Methods of teaching for transformative learning
Martyn Rawson
Introduction
This book addresses a topic that has been largely neglected in Waldorf literature over the years, that of methods and teaching and learning. If I am not mistaken, this is the first detailed and systematic account of teaching methods. There are interesting reasons why this is the case and there are, I also believe there are good reasons why it is necessary to write about methods.
Perhaps the most obvious reasons why there has been little literature and often very little in teacher training relating to methods of teaching has to do with Steiner’s method of developing and presenting his ideas on education. This was mainly through lectures and discussion with teachers. By the time Steiner founded the Waldorf School he had become a consummate lecturer, capable of using the art of speaking to lead his audience into a particular way of experiencing ideas, that could be called thinking narrative or narrative thinking. A lecture is like a story that tells a tale, which the audience can follow. In the case of Steiner’s education lectures, and these varied considerably depending on the audience, whether educationalists at a conference at Oxford University, state-school teachers in Switzerland, German, English or Dutch anthroposophists, or a wide general public, his aim was to lead people beyond the horizon of what they thought they knew into a new context of ideas. He sought to meet his audience where they were in time and geographical and cultural space, speak to them in context out of the situation.
The way he did it was to exemplify the level of consciousness that was necessary to follow the thoughts that he was developing and take his audience of a learning journey. As he put it himself, “anthroposophical lectures don’t tyrannize but aim to awaken the will of the listener” (2020, p. 80).As we know from a journalist from the Manchester Guardian Newspaper, who attended a lecture in Oxford, Steiner’s abilities to convey a sequence of thoughts with dynamic energy in ways that appeared to move people deeply was apparent to him, even though the journalist understood no German! Yet by most accounts, people were not manipulated or seduced into following – it required their willingness, openness and intention to follow. It only worked if you let it. But if you opened yourself, as in attending concert of theater production, going with the lecture led the members of the audience to see things in new ways. But this was not the teachings of a guru. The words and his presence alone were not transformative. You had to take hold of the new experience and work with it, assimilate it and make it your own, including being reflective and critical. Steiner was metaphorically offering water to the participants, but he didn’t want to force them to drink- rather he tapped into their thirst for meaning and ensured that the ‘water’ he was offering was sweet and drinkable. No doubts there were also sceptics present who did get it or didn’t want to be taken on the learning journey. But that is what freedom is.
In the case of the First Teachers’ Course in Stuttgart in August/September 1919, he was speaking to a small intimate group of hand-picked people, most of whom were experienced anthroposophists. His purpose was twofold. He wanted to raise their awareness of the implications of an anthroposophical understanding of the nature of the human being for teaching (the first lectures in the morning from 9.00 to 10.15), what he called general educational ideas, and then he wanted to give them some specific examples of how to teach. These second strand of lectures were referred to in German as Methodisch-Didaktisches, which has been translated as methods of teaching. The word ‘method’ also comes from Latinate Greek; methodos means ‘path to the goal’ or, metaphorically, ‘the way in which one travels and the experiences one has on the journey’ (www.merriam-webster.com). So method is the learning journey. The ‘didactic’ part of the phrase refers to Greek term διδάσκειν didáskein meaning the art and science of teaching. In English the term pedagogy refers to the craft, art and science of teaching and learning, so this would be a more appropriate translation for the second set of lectures in the First Teachers’ Course, starting at 10.30 a.m. In these lectures Steiner rarely made the direct link between the nature of the developing child and the method explicit, probably because he assumed the process described above, namely that the teachers would be following his train of thought, could make the connections, or even that they were obvious.
Most educational theory in the sense of the explanation of behind a certain practice is presented in a systematic way along the lines of; these are the aims and these are the methods to achieving these aims based on an understanding of how children and young people learn. Such an approach is to enable teachers to gain a rational, comprehensible and, ideally, practical understanding of that particular educational approach. Often the aims are quite specific, usually the attainment of certain observable or measurable outcomes and so therefore much teacher preparation is concerned with them learning how to optimize the outcome by utilizing the most effective methods. In fact, in most teacher education programmes today, the theory mainly focuses on optimizing certain kinds of learning. Pedagogical anthropology and child and youth development are often separated from the practical business of preparing lessons and assessing student work and kept to a minimum. People who study child development and learning go on to be educational psychologists or social workers. The outcomes emphasis reflects the dominant trends in education over most of the past 70 years, which has been to harness education to serve the needs of the economy. Such education policies were informed loosely by behaviourist theory and its more recent version developed by the neurosciences about how children learn best.
What Steiner said about methods
Steiner’s method was quite different both in intention and form.  If one extracts the various reference Steiner made to teaching methods in the First Teachers’ Course, we find an interesting blend of very practical, detailed suggestions, such as those he gave for introducing certain letters , developing maps in geography lessons, certain colour sequences in painting, how students should create their own books on topics such as how soap is made, how cigarettes are made, and a number of generalized statements. These include,
Subjects should be taught in such a way that the forces of body and soul can develop in the right way, knowledge is not an end in itself but a means to developing abilities.
The artistic method of teaching the letters should merely be a bridge, not a method that lasts a whole year (he says if we did that they wouldn’t learn to read until they were 20!). Later (p.120) Steiner reiterates the sequence of transitions from drawing to writing, cursive writing to reading then printed letters.
Unlike the forms of the letters, the forms of the numbers are less important that what they stand for. The numbers and many other things are simply taught because that’s how grown-ups do it.
The arts should focus more om inner expression than imitating outer forms (but this is an emphasis, not a fixed rule)
We should proceed from the whole to the parts (these all from 21.8.1919)
Narrative/story telling engages the feelings and will of the children.
We should offer living images rather than definitions and develop these over the years.
The sounds (consonants and vowels) convey rich feeling through language.
It is important for the teacher to feel that education continues the work of the spiritual world in forming the children’s abilities.
Drawing and painting colours are to some extent polarities, and colour has primacy over linear form.
Teachers should cultivate a sense of respect for the achievements of previous generations.
Lessons should involve real and practical work that is meaningful and relates to life.
Children should be told what things are (example given is, “this is a straight line, this is a curve”) directly after they have drawn the forms.
Through developing an understanding of the parts of a sentence and types of words the children develop a feeling for language and language is central to their sense of themselves and their identity but also is the basis for selflessness.
Important themes in life should be build up year by year by returning to these themes in a spiral curriculum.
Teachers should use their ingenuity and practical imagination and keep methods simple and to the point.
The threefold nature of the human being should be taught before looking the realms of nature.
Animals should be characterized individually, though in their environmental context and compared, whereas plants and insects should be introduced ecologically.
Important developmental transitions (he refers to two Rubicons, in the 9th/19th years and 11th/12th years).
After the 12th year students can understand and be interested in historical concepts.
All concepts should be drawn from life experiences.
Teachers should always build on what students already know and recall what they have learned at the end of a block and at the beginning of each new block.
There is some detailed advice about additional languages (don’t translate, don’t teach grammar, but let children discover the rules and compare them with the mother tongue, use authentic language).
This list is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to show the range and nature of Steiner’s advice of teaching methods. Each of these ideas has a context and some involve discussions of other educational approaches Steiner disapproves of.  The overriding impression is that Steiner is trying to cultivate general attitudes, ways of seeing rather than building up any systematic methodology or pedagogy, not least because many of the suggestions are not offered as absolutes- this is how we do it- but rather offer an emphasis, rather than being prescriptive.
This may have been sufficient to get the Waldorf School going, followed by monthly feedback and further suggestions during his visits to the school. It is indicative that he did not take up an office as school director, literally with an office, from which to manage the school on a daily basis- that was Stockmeyer’s role, but rather he set the tone, provided a way of understanding children, made some suggestions, and then left most of the detailed work to the teachers.
However, because of the canonization (or fossilization) of Steiner’s educational ideas after his death, the process of further development of the pedagogy has been limited within the Waldorf movement. When new teachers join a school, when school inspections occur, when it is necessary to change anything (which is frequently), we need more than the transmission of a tradition of a sets of practices, and if Waldorf education wants to make a difference to the maximum number of children- which I believe it should- then we need a more systematic approach that builds on the traditions. My view of the future of Waldorf education is one that sees a systematic approach based on Steiner’s anthroposophical anthropology and a set of generative principle derived from this supplemented by relevant knowledge from other fields of research. Taking the aims of Waldorf education, the developmental situation of the students and the requirements of the curriculum into account, teachers can choose appropriate methods.
What is the relationship of method to pedagogical anthropology?
Waldorf education starts with the nature of the developing human being from an anthroposophical perspective based on Steiner’s anthroposophy but also supplemented by other relevant and appropriate knowledge from the human sciences. I refer to this as Waldorf pedagogical anthropology (WPA). This includes the theory of child and youth development that underpins Waldorf education. Secondly, teachers take account of the general aims of Waldorf education, as well as the aims of specific subjects in age-relevant ways. I have attempted to relate each aspect of teaching methods referred to in this book to WPA.
Then the teacher takes the curriculum into account. As I have outlined in other publications (Rawson, 2021, Rawson & Bransby, 2026) I interpret curriculum as what needs to be taught and why, taking the developmental tasks of each age group into account, where and when the teaching should take place, and also how it is taught, which brings us to methods. Once it is clear what needs to be taught and why, the teacher chooses a path of learning for the given situation. It is this aspect that is the focus of this book.
We can show this graphically as follows.
Figure 1 The iteration of Waldorf education that arrives at methods
Thus, in preparing lessons, the teacher takes multiple factors into account, though these can be lumped together as developmental aspects on the one hand and curriculum aspects on the other. The choices made weave a learning path (the methodos) from day to day, week to week, month to month and year to year. We can show this is a somewhat abstract way using the following graphic.
Figure 2 An idealized and abstract account of the methodos weaving together developmental and curriculum aspects.
Of course, nothing is a straightforward as this graphic suggests. In reality, the actual developmental pathways taken by individuals are anything but linear, with periods of stasis and dynamic movement, of steps backwards and leaps forward. Likewise, the curriculum incorporates all kinds of phenomena, subjects and activities and does not process in a regular and linear way. It actually looks something like this.
Figure 3 This graphic gives a more realistic view of the process of choosing methods
How methods relate to learning
The methods chosen, serve a purpose. This is generally the learning of the individual students, but this may be best served by considering the whole learning group, the class. Usually, lesson planning starts with a whole class perspective and then differentiates to accommodate individual needs or the requirements different groups within the class.
As we have seen, a method is a way of getting somewhere, of achieving something, and that means that methods are chosen depending on what the aims are. One can therefore categorise methods in relation to their purpose. These categories might include methods to:
open up a subject and start a learning process,
motivate and activate students,
apply, practice or develop things that have been introduced,
monitor and assess learning,
round off a phase of learning.
Another way of looking at this question is to look at the degree of self-activity and level of consciousness of the students in the different phases of learning and which teaching methods support this. If we take an archetypal sequence of learning typical of Waldorf education, this starts with emersion in a field of experience either by overserving or doing (and usually both to some extent). Assuming that immersion is essentially an activity in which the learner participates, this has to be followed by a phase of recalling, reflecting, identifying and connecting. I call this emersion. This is followed by a phase in which what has been learned is applied so that skills can be developed and consolidated. New skills need to be applied and practiced, ideally embedded in meaningful situations and ultimately developed to their full potential. We can summarize this process as follows.
Warming up- getting ready.
Immersion in the experience.
Emerging- making conscious what has been assimilated during immersion and waking up to it cognitively.
Acquiring and consolidating skills to gain understanding of primary qualities, basic forms and essential rules, build up memory of structures and forms through practice.
Embedding skills and moving towards competence through applying new knowledgeable skills in meaningful (real) contexts to establish constrained skills.
Extending, refining skills into abilities, developing unconstrained skills through self-directed learning.
Furthermore, methods are informed by deeper seated attitudes about what we think teaching and learning is actually about. Depending on what we believe to be the nature of human learning and the best way to achieve this we will have to make choices between:
the style of mediating knowledge or knowledge generation: between instruction, exposition and learning through discovery
how the lessons are structured: between guided learning and self-determined learning.
There is often a tension between what teachers do to guide learning (and they always guide the learning to some extent, however much discovery and self-directed learning is involved), the aim of enabling autonomous learners and the requirement to secure learning - that is to establish whether students have actually learned what they should (which is conventionally done using testing). It is always a question of how we get from A to B whilst ensuring that we do get to B. This is a balancing act between things pulling in opposite directions. The question is how directed should learning be and how open is it to unplanned, unexpected, unintended outcomes (the answer to which is probably that unintended outcomes are acceptable if they are additional to the intended ones). It is important to be aware of the learning aims and thus assess the usefulness of the methods chosen.
I have defined learning as sustainable change in the whole person, body, soul and spirit, over the life course. This is transformative learning. The learning process, as I have explained elsewhere (Rawson, 2021), involves a number of activities or phases, which I briefly summarize here.
Learning activities
Figure 4 Table showing the main learning activities
In the Torrance Incubation Model -TIM (Torrance and Safter, 1990), seeks to explain how creative thinking is learned, the model emphasizes students being enabled to be prepared for learning and then to maintain curiosity after an initial experience, by looking again, taking a closer look, looking at thing from different perspectives, by digging deeper, asking questions and reflecting on what has been learned. Torrance emphasizes the three activities of heightening anticipation, deepening expectations and keeping it going (I can recommend Hines, Catalana and Anderson, 2019, for a detailed account of this).  I believe that Waldorf education aligns with this view, though I doubt many Waldorf teachers have ever heard of Torrance. Waldorf education would offer a fuller account of the spiritual dimension of this process, but the TIM model offers a more fine-grained account of the method itself
The pedagogy of methods
“People prefer to learn creatively- by exploring, questioning, manipulating, rearranging things, testing and modifying, listening, looking, feeling- and then thinking about it-incubating” (Torrance and Safter, 1990, p.13)
Pedagogy is the craft, art and science of teaching for learning. That is to say, it involves the relationship between teaching and learning (which is not always one of cause and effect- teaching does not automatically result in learning) , and is therefore also about the relationship between teacher and student and between both of them and the subject matter being taught. The nature of these relationships is therefore part of the methods, the ‘how’ of learning.
The basic pedagogical relationship consists in someone (the teacher) teaching something to someone (the learner) with a meaningful purpose. What is taught has to be meaningful to both the teacher and the learner and therefore an essential part of teaching is enabling the learner to recognize the meaningfulness of what they are learning. The teacher is interested in the students, who ideally respect the teacher and the teacher directs the attention of the students to the subject matter, to the phenomena being studied. We can show this triad of relationship as follows.
Figure 5 The triadic relationship between student, teacher and subject matter.
In the lower school up until puberty, the teacher directs the student’s attention to the subject matter and gains the respect of the teacher when this process is experienced as fruitful. This is the basis of the teacher’s authority because the student experiences the teacher as someone who can enable them to learn. One of the most important generative principals in Waldorf education is teacher economy, which means that the teacher must prepare the material in such a way that the student can experience what is essential in the most economical way in terms of time and effort. This depends on the teacher having such a comprehensive relationship to the material that they can present it such a way that the student recognizes quickly what is salient and important with their whole being. This requirement is daunting for beginners (and class teachers are always beginners when they prepare a new main lesson block, even if they’ve done it before). For this reason, it is important that accounts of the curriculum (or prepared lesson plans for beginners), direct the teacher towards what is essential.
After puberty, the relationship shifts more towards one between the student and the subject matter, with the teacher in a supporting role. Before puberty the teacher personifies and embodies the learning process, after puberty the teacher is of interest as a person and expert in certain fields. The grade-school teachers are primarily experts in the learning process, which is why the relationship to the subject is mediated by the teacher. Over the course of the middle and high school this shifts in (if we formulate this in a very general way) from the teacher to the subject matter, to the phenomena.
The graphic above shows the arrows pointing in both directions. In the case of teacher-student the mutuality is clear, likewise the relationship of both teacher and student to the subject matter. Less clear, is how there is a mutuality between the subject matter and both the teacher and the students. The philosophical theory of intentionality says that when we become conscious of an object we enter into a relationship with it, in which both, we as subjects and the objects or phenomena, are in some way changed by the relationship. This is a very unfamiliar way of thinking, but it is a holistic way that assumes that the world is not simply there full of inherent meaning or governed by laws that don’t ‘care’ whether we are aware of them or not, or whether we even exist. Does it matter to the mountain that people build their village on its flanks? The philosophy of intentionality says, yes it does matter. And Steiner’s theory of knowledge posits that human being are not merely passive observers of what goes on in the world, but co-creators of reality. The world exists without us, but lacks meaning. Human beings give the world meaning through their act of co-creating meaning, or at least we have the potentiality to do this.
Prior to modern scientific and materialistic thinking, all philosophies and religions have experienced that human beings are embedded in webs of relationships to the world, which was frequently experienced as animate, as being. Generally, the spiritual dimension of nature and the invisible worlds were seen as more powerful than human beings and thus the relationship was one that humans and their cultures had to attend to, so that the gods would favour them with nature’s plenty and reduce the risks of nature’s overwhelming power. The modern West lost this capacity to experience the world in this way and the ‘balance of power’ has shifted. In the Anthropocene, human activity is seriously disrupting the balance of nature (though many people still deny this).
If we assume that it is important for young people (who have lost their direct intuitive connection to the spiritual dimension of the world following puberty) to form an existential relationship to the world (of culture and nature), then they need to encounter the phenomena and not simply be told about this relationship by teachers, have them mediate it. What helps the pedagogical process enormously is if the teacher also lives and existential relationship to the subject matter. When high school teachers teach the same things more or less each year, it becomes increasingly difficult to maintain and renew this existential nature of their relationship to the phenomena. Apart from keeping up to speed with research in their field (or indeed doing research), teachers can maintain their level of inner activity by researching and actively working with the curriculum and methods of teaching in their subjects.
Templates for working curriculum frameworks
Curricula are mainly used by beginning teachers, or teachers beginning a new teaching block, for orientation. There are different ways of doing this, since simply offering a long list of possible topics that can be taught in a given class and subject does tell the teacher much. I have been involved in developing some new methods of presenting curriculum, which it might be of interest to the reader to outline briefly. The European Council of Steiner Waldorf Education, which represents 28 national Waldorf associations in Europe, identified the need of its members for a common core-curriculum framework, because education authorities are increasingly seeking to limit the Waldorf schools in favour of national standards or competence frameworks. Not all Waldorf associations have the resources to ‘invent’ the curriculum wheel again, and it was felt that if all 840 Waldorf schools in Europe had a common core curriculum, it would strengthen their hand in negotiations with ministries. Given the cultural differences between the countries (and some countries have multiple education authorities, each with their own requirements) regarding language, culture and history, it was decided to frame a curriculum without, wherever possible, specifying content. Secondly it was felt vital that Waldorf curriculum should not just be about content but also how things are taught. In many countries, the state has similar content in a given age-group but very different methods, especially in science and technology. It was therefore decided to provide two perspectives for each subject and class, a description of what students should learn and the main teaching methods (here called strategies). The following screenshot gives an example of the language arts in grade 4 (adapted for European languages that are alphabetical).
Another example from grade 5 biology (here botany).
This approach is a streamlined version of a curriculum framework designed as a digital application for the use of Waldorf schools in the UK. This tool provides teachers with lesson planning and documentation support in the form of a digital framework that provides the following levels of information:
Macro level developmental themes
Descriptors for the content and themes of each main lesson block (for ongoing subjects, termly overviews)
A pedagogical rationale
Main teaching methods
Cross curricular links
Possible resources
Modes of assessment.
This curriculum framework makes it possible to show progressions in subjects as well as the growth of core skills, for the purposes of formative and summative assessment. A version of this model that was developed in Taiwan in the CiXin school included transcripts interviews with experienced teachers who were asked what particular facets were important and innovative (and the data analyzed by AI) available to other teachers on an internal online platform. This work was informed by a detailed survey of methods used by all teachers across all subjects and age groups.
A recent development based on these examples has been to consider in what way new teachers could be provided with curated lesson plans designed to meet students’ needs but also as a learning tool by the teacher using them. Such lesson plans would be drawn up by designated master teachers following a specific template and would offer teachers with sufficient scope to innovate and try out their own ideas. The thinking behind this approach is that the internet is full of lesson plans that can be download and AI can quickly produce them when teachers request them, which they increasingly do. Firstly, these plans are curated by experienced master teachers, and secondly, they follow a specific structure, with build in reflective tasks. Such a template would have to be general for a whole main lesson block and then have a daily lesson plan. The structure could be as follows.
Figure 6 A template for developing lesson plans for beginning teachers, including reflective tasks
Core methods of Waldorf education
Waldorf education has long been characterized as offering a phenomenological approach and this is usually associated with science. It also has a symptomatological approach in the humanities. Both of these approaches go back to Steiner’s theory of knowledge, in which he distinguished between epistemologies for generating knowledge of the physical world, in biology, in the human and social sciences. These also form the basis for what he called spiritual science, a scientific approach to researching the non-physical world. Closer study of how Steiner developed and applied this shows that this is a highly complex field, with many twists and turns. What concerns us here are the methods that are relevant to Waldorf education, which is after all not a field for spiritual science, at least not as something that is taught to children and young people. Teachers, of course should use anthroposophical methods to research their practice and develop their capacities. My review of actual practice has led me to extent the general methods used in Waldorf eduaction, to include art appreciation, performance and crafting.
Phenomenology
As Wilfried Sommer (2014, 2019, 2020) shows the primary method used in Waldorf science teaching starts with embodied observation, through reconstruction of experience, discussion and finally to a recognition in thinking of the intrinsic structures of that experience and the underlying principles. This is referred to a phenomenological approach, though the relationship to scientific or philosophical phenomenology is tenuous. What is referred to as phenomenological approach is based on Steiner’s theory of knowledge. Schieren (2012, p. 77) explains the status of such knowledge as follows, “Based on a conceptually realistic understanding, Steiner …regards the concepts generated by thinking not merely as a person’s subjective products but as ontologically founded entities that emerge partially, within the limited section of a given human act of thinking, but still on the basis of their entelechy.” Sommer draws on this account to make the case that the students are able to access the universal principle through the particular phenomenon.
Phenomenology in the specific sense used in Waldorf schools applies to the way science is taught. It means that science teaching starts with the encounter with a phenomenon (usually through direct perception or where this is not possible through accurate description, e.g. in astronomy), such as something burning and being transformed by fire, or the way shadows fall with one or two light sources, or how the fruit forms on a plant or the overall body shape of an animal. These are things are first observed, then described, contextualized and named and then a concept is formed that captures the characteristic of the phenomenon. Usually this leads to discussion about the significance of the phenomenon, for example for practical application, or in the case of biology, the implications for the organism, its environment and relationship to human activities.
This is how science is taught up until grade 8. In the high school, this approach is extended to include discussion of the laws governing phenomena, how living organisms are classified, how chemical processes can be represented by formula or how mathematics is used to measure relationships. The origin of this process is Steiner’s theory of knowledge, in which he described different approaches to inorganic, organic and cultural and psychological phenomena. The nature of the inorganic world can be defined by the laws of nature and causality and demonstrated by proof. In way of approaching the organic world is to try to perceive the organism in its processes of emergence, that is how it grows and forms. Each species has its own characteristic and original form, which Steiner called the type, which can then manifest in many variations, “the basic element is an organism in the form of the: a general form of the organism which includes within itself all particular forms. This general organism we will call, after the precedent of Goethe, the type” (Steiner, 1968). The type is the idea of the organism, rather than the actual plant or animal, and each type can manifest in many subtypes or subspecies. This reference to Goethe as the source of this approach is why this is often referred to as Goethean science.
Goethean science
Steiner was strongly influenced by Goethe, and this come to expression in particular in his approach to nature study and science teaching. Goethe developed an approach to science that involved close observation of natural phenomena with an inner mood of reverence and wonder, in contrast the feeling that often arises, of wishes to grasp and control the phenomena.  This consciousness goes over into another level of sensibility, in which we allow the phenomena to ‘speak’ to us, an interaction brought about through the thoughts that arise when we contemplate the phenomenon. Craig Holdrege describes this as follows.
Doing Goethean science means treading a path of consciousness development. The question accompanying every aspect of the work is, “How can I make myself into a better, more transparent instrument of knowing? In traditional science, we are much more likely to ask, “ How can I find ways of adapting the phenomena to my specific approach so that I can answer my question?”(2005, pp.30-1)
In biology teaching, therefore the organism or organ being studied is treated as a whole and the description starts with the form, the growth of the form from infancy to maturity, and then identified within a living context (habitat) and the functions related to other organs of in the case of a whole organism, to other living organisms and the overall ecological context. Something of this approach is applied not only to separate organisms, but to whole ecological spaces (the pond, the forest, the prairie) and whole landscapes through the changing seasons.
The beaver, for example, is first described in its anatomy, which is adapted to diving and swimming in fresh water, how their incredibly thick fur is waterproof and warm, catch fish and gnawing the wood of trees, which it the drags into complex structure of dams and lodges. Then the children learn (usually through narrative and images) how beaver reproduce, what state baby beaver are in, how they grow and learn, what they eat and where and how they build their dams and lodges and what impact this has on their environment. Then the students learn how and why beaver were hunted by indigenous people and how their pelts were so valued in Europe, that vast quantities were ‘harvested’ by fur trappers and transported to Europe, and finally how beaver are now protected and are being re-introduced because their dams help absorb flood waters upstream and reduce flooding downstream in cities. They also learn that this advantage involves some loss of trees for foresters.
This whole process, however, circles around the type, which is a rodent, whose incisor teeth continuously grow and practically force the animal to gnaw. The beaver is specialist form of this. Part of Steiner’s approach was to look at the form of the animal from a three-fold perspective, distinguishing between the functional qualities of the head and nervous system, the trunk and rhythmical system and the metabolic and limb systems, as a way lens to distinguish between the different primal types. This means describing animals in which the sense organs are particularly prominent and in which this one-sided quality has a strong anatomical expression, which is why he named the squid or octopus, which as we now know, is a highly intelligent and adaptable animal, in that the nerve-sense-brain function is distributed over the whole body. In contrast the cow has an incredibly powerful and complex digestive system, that can process vast quantities of grass, which it converts into body bulk, which provide us with milk and meat. The cow is of course a domesticated animal, and so one could choose a wild bovid ungulate, like the bison or buffalo. The lion is given as an example of an animal that has developed a powerful trunk and rhythmic system as evidenced by their powerful voice, though given their powerful limbs and digestive systems, one sees how this perspective has its limits.
The point is Steiner wanted to characterize the different animals in such a way that the children can identify with them and recognize their remarkable skills, but also their one-sidedness. To some extent the approach to animals is also to focus on the nature of the human being, by emphasizing that human beings have a highly developed anatomy but that using culture we can produce tools that do the work that the claws, teeth, wings and sense organs of animals, summed up by the phrase, animals are what humans have. Also, more than half of the biology lessons across the curriculum are devoted to human biology.
Traditionally, animal and plant studies in Waldorf education tended to focus on the individual plants and animals, because this is how Steiner presented his examples, but what has perhaps been somewhat overlooked is the need to show that plants and animals coexist in mutually dependent relationships within ecological contexts. This holistic approach is evident in everything Steiner said and wrote about the natural world, but somehow was not picked up by earlier generations of Waldorf teachers and is unrepresented in traditional Waldorf secondary literature. The work of Craig Holdrege (2011, 2013, 2015, 2018) and the Nature Institute has done much to redress this imbalance.
Craig Holdrege describes the Goethean method of doing science as a conversation with nature prompted by a desire to understand the riddles of nature. It is an open exchange not burdened by preconceptions of what I expect or hope to find, and which can respond to discoveries we make along the way and being open to things turning out differently to what we had expected. Nature is treated with respect, which means we do not expect everything to be revealed at once, nor do we apply methods that destroy the phenomenon we want to study. We try to listen to what nature has to say, which does mean we are passive. It is not a conversation if we do not “respond and interject” through my questions, observations and concepts. In engaging with nature, we are willing to be changed through the process and nature “finds a new expression through the process of human knowing”. This should not surprise us because we are separate from the world, but co-creators. That means there is no value-free science; science always involves participation and that changes all parties involved.
The difference between this Goethean approach and science teaching in school, is a matter of emphasis. As teachers we do not have time for students to learn everything through careful, patient observation, which is why we refer to it as ‘semi-Goethean’. We cannot have lengthy field trips to immerse ourselves in the realm we are discovering, nor do the students have the background knowledge that a scientist has. In a sense we have to set up learning opportunities so that the students are able to quickly have the relevant experiences. Having said that, there is great value in doing less but more thoroughly, and field trips wherever possible enhance the depth of learning. But we are often creating artificial situations to demonstrate a phenomenon, or we are dealing with indirect experience through narrative or media (text or image). We are also guiding the conversation between the students and the phenomena.
Nevertheless, there is a world of difference between telling the students the concept and looking for evidence of this, rather than presenting the phenomenon, ideally through immersion, or at least through rich secondary experience, reconstructing this later through exact picture building (including perhaps revisiting the phenomenon for more information) and drawing conclusions that can be the basis for understanding, which means putting what we now know into a wider context (sometimes referred to as arriving at concepts). Many, perhaps most school textbooks and science programmes start with the outcome, explain the historical basis for arriving at this theory or model (or facts), show its implications and ways of demonstrating it., Exams then test the student’s ability to apply the rule, theory or model to solving problems related to demonstrating the model. This is not of course how science research works, which usually starts with a question about something that is not known or has not been investigated in detail within an existing model and paradigm, often framing this as a hypothesis, then designs observations or experiments to explore the phenomena. The data are then analysed, and statements formulated. For example, ice cores from a glacier or from the ice sheet in Antarctic are bored and the air bubbles in the ice analysed to show the constitution of the air at the time, from which assumptions can be made about the climate. This method builds on existing knowledge about how layers of ice are formed, about how to date the layers and about the composition of the atmosphere. On the basis of this research, new knowledge about climate change can be established.
Waldorf science teaching is rarely in the position to do research, though individual students have done so as part of their grade 12 project. Therefore, science teaching in the high school builds on the observation skills learned through the ‘phenomenological’ phase from class 6 onwards, but also works with theoretical paradigms and certainly discusses the ethical, ecological and cultural significance of science. To take an example from biology, students in grades 11 or 12 can do field work, for example, in coastal tidal zones, in which they sample the wadden sea mud. The first step is simply to have a full sensory experience of the place, the sea, the wind, the tidal flats over the course of the tides, the bird and plant life. Secondly, they do experiments outdoors, for example sampling a square meter of mud and documenting the variety of species of molluscs and worms and their frequency. Surveys can be made of bird species (of which there are many depending on the season). Indoors in a laboratory (at the marine field station there for the purpose of supporting educational work) the students can use microscopes and conduct experiments measuring the beathing activity of the molluscs in relation of oxygen in the water, or the oxygen production of plants and algae. Similar work can be done on fields trips to forest, meadows, rock pools and agricultural land. This is not research in order to make new discoveries, but it shows the students how science can be used to understand natural phenomena. Similarly, experiments can be designed in chemistry and the various branches of physics.
Quite a few Waldorf graduates we know personally have gone on to do PhD level scientific research in various fields including informational technology and medicine. A good quality Waldorf education is no hindrance to studying science, though a poor-quality education will make it harder.
WPA: This method is essentially based on Steiner’s theory of knowledge and modern accounts of Goethean science.
Good Waldorf practice: learning about nature goes through three basic phases; noticing and appreciating nature, exploring phenomena in detail (in a semi-Goethean way) and using scientific methods (and instruments like microscopes) to explore phenomena. The aim of Waldorf science is to cultivate a relationship, a sense of wonder and the power of judgement in the respective scientific fields.
Symptomatology
In Steiner’s theory of knowledge, he offered a quite different approach to the study of the humanities (Steiner, 1968) in which there appears the fundamental distinction between nature and culture.  His view was that in contrast to the inorganic world which can be explained by laws operating on things, and the organic world in which organism can be understood as an elaboration of an idea, the type, human behaviour cannot be reduced to these, though much of modern science does just that in that it explains human behaviour as the result of genetics and the neurology. Steiner doesn’t deny that humans are influenced by the laws of physics -we fall down when we trip, and the movement of our skeleton, tendons and muscles reflects the laws of mechanics, and our body chemistry is still biochemistry. The human species has a body type that has endless variations in size, shape, colour, hair type and we obviously have a enough common biology that surgeons anywhere in the world can successfully operate on total strangers. But Steiner’s lens for generating knowledge and understanding people is to look at the motivation and how they express themselves. In the human sciences, we don’t understand the particular in terms of general categories, but rather we try to see the particular and understand it in itself, in terms of how it brings itself to expression.
Understanding the human being means understanding the person in the context of their people, their language and their culture and what this brings to expression. Steiner spoke about folk-characteristics and the constitution of a particular people, but this is something that we should be very careful with. Perhaps characterizing a people is best done by those people themselves if they feel the need to do this. What Steiner, in his lectures on history and symptomatology, did was to characterize cultures, events in history and individuals in terms of their spiritual development. Their actions and productions may be seen as expressive of something within them that is coming to expression. Reading Steiner one can often have the impression that this is a teleological view, that is people’s behaviour and destinies are seen as a stage on the way to a different, more complete or higher development. This is how he describes the cultural epochs; each epoch expresses the spiritual and consciousness development of a particular culture, ‘preparing’ the next stage. The ultimate goal in human cultural development is enabling people to attain freedom from all determining factors. Steiner’s cultural evolution is way of looking at history from the perspective of the emancipation of the individual.
If we apply this approach in a school context, we do not expect young people to develop the kind of reflexive thinking that Steiner is talking about in his philosophical works, nor should we teach them the results of his spiritual research or interpretation of history. But this is very much what has happened in teaching cultural epochs and in particular art history, as the emergence from a collective consciousness to a more individual consciousness, which culminates in the Renaissance. Steiner doesn’t seem to have much to offer after the Renaissance, though ironically, his basic notion that art manifests the spiritual (or in Paul Klee’s words, “makes the invisible, visible) inspired many classic modern artists. This, however, is a very oversimplified and totally Eurocentric view of art and needs to be significantly decolonized.
The primary method used in the humanities, and especially history, cultural studies and literature is referred to a symptomatology. This is a less clearly defined educational concept. As explained by Glas (1981), this involves a notion that cultural evolution is characterized by an underlying structure of themes, such the gradual emancipation of the individual from the collective and a corresponding change of relationships between societies and the spiritual and material worlds, as exemplified by successive cultural epochs. Key events in history reflect significant moments in this changing consciousness. This is seen by Glas (1981) as a correlation to the development of the child. Lindenberg (1989) emphasizes the emergence of self-consciousness over history. Such key moments are seen as ‘symptoms’ of underlying processes, using the metaphor of history is a living organism. The focus is not what happened in a given year (e.g. 1789 in France) but rather what processes and forces come to expression. This often involves identifying polarities and binaries (e.g. society and the individual), the metamorphosis of one idea into others (e.g. the golden ration and architecture). Art, architecture and technology are seen as ‘symptoms’ of underlying states of consciousness and in particular the emergence of new consciousness. In literature, myth and certain classic works of literature are seen as ‘symptomatic’ of individuation processes within the individual, the quest for selfhood or redemption (Staley, 2025). The idea most frequently referenced in connection with this approach is an unreferenced citation of Steiner saying, “ To study history as symptomatology is to seek the reality behind the appearances”, or expressed in statements such as “ what is actually happening in the human spirit behind this current event”.
Michael Zech (2023) points out that in Steiner’s early epistemological works, he stood by the Goethean view that the sense-perceptible world is a revelation of the spiritual. By relating the experiences or phenomena directly through thinking, we create reality. In the studies of the humanities or culture which is a product of the human mind, and therefore we need to under the human mind, mentality, mode of consciousness at any point in history to understand culture. Whether Steiner saw history as teleological, i.e. moving towards a predetermined goal, is ambivalent and arguments can be made for both positions, that of the fundamental openness of history and the potential for human freedom, and the directly of historical processes by guiding higher spiritual beings working through particular individuals, whose interventions in human history, Steiner frequently mentions, especially in his theosophical phase from around 1900 onwards. The first position is supported by Steiner’s statements that history is always the history of human beings and the unfolding of human activity and that there is no underlying plan. We can understand history by understanding the motives and ideas of historical actors. In his lectures on symptomatic history from 1918, Steiner (2015) takes the clear stance that historical events should be understood as revealing the underlying reality of human evolution, though he is specific about the methods he uses to identify these. He also says that the events are images of the underlying forces at work, but observation and analysis of the outer events can lead to insights. As Zech comments, Steiner uses his spiritual insights to give meaning to historical events and recommends if we use them heuristically to direct our attention to the inherent processes, which we apprehend intuitively – in a Goethean sense – when we engage with history imaginatively.
Steiner did not, to my knowledge give clear indications whether this is the approach that should be used to teach history in school, but the first teachers were undoubtedly familiar with his most recent thinking on history, and although they were aware that he was insistent that no anthroposophical concepts be taught in the Waldorf School, there was a clear assumption that Steiner intended history teaching to reflect his view of changing cultures  and evolving human consciousness. The central idea running throughout history is the idea of human autonomy as an ongoing process of emancipation and individuation, first of groups then of individuals, ultimately leading to socially responsible autonomous individuals. Rather than promoting any particular cultural or national identity, history teaching in the Waldorf school is to promote a cosmopolitan respect for the diversities of cultures and for a transcultural, pan-human set of values and human rights, with human dignity as the central tenet.
History teaching in Waldorf schools until fairly recently had a Eurocentric perspective, but over the recent decades, prompted by the processes decolonizing curricula, that started in universities, it has increasingly sought to overcome this and replace this with more global awareness and cosmopolitan sensibilities. This is very much work in progress.
The teaching methods used in this approach, however, are predominantly narrative in history teaching, whereas in literature the text is interpreted. In either case, the aim is not top provide pre-digested explanations, but rather to let the narrative or text produce an affect in the students, which through discussion can be brought to a characterization of the underlying structures. Perhaps the transactional hermeneutic aspect of the subjective effect of the narrative or the text could play a stronger role in this approach, which carries the risk of suggestion by the teacher as what the underlying structure or meaning is, rather than allowing the students to formulate for themselves what comes to expression through the experience and what this might mean. The dialogic process of making sense and meaning making (Rawson, 2021) in the learning process, is in my view what should characterize the symptomatic process, rather than the teaching signalling the underlying significance of the events or texts studied, especially when this involves directly the students towards ideas embodied in Steiner’s anthroposophy. This both contradicts Steiner often repeated insistence that Waldorf education should not teach anthroposophical ‘dogmas’ (e.g. in Steiner, 1996, lecture from 13th January, 1921). Furthermore, as I and others have pointed out, Steiner’s cultural epochs are both Eurocentric and historically unverified (Rawson, 2025a, Zech, 2020, Myers, 2006).
Symptomatology in the curriculum means using interpretive, or hermeneutic approaches, that are actually quite close to the Goethean phenomenological approach in the sciences. A social, cultural or psychological phenomenon is considered, described in its form and techniques, and above all in the effect it has on us as beholders. We ask, what does this picture or poem or piece of music do to us, what feelings and will impulses does it bring forth in us? What affects does the encounter with a human artefact prompt in us (an affect is our response to what comes from outside, whereas a feeling arises within us after we have perceived, or remembered something and an emotion is our response to a bodily state)? We ask two questions; what brings about these affects and feelings and how does the artist or maker use the medium (colour, form, sound, materials etc.) to bring this about? This is how we approach literature, the arts. History is a somewhat different matter because we are always dealing with reconstructions, and these are shaped by the person doing the reconstruction. But history as narrative, as multiple narratives, tell us both about the events being recorded and the perspective of those telling the story. Therefore, the art of historical narrative (see section on narrative) is very important, so that teachers recreate a historical situation based on the best evidence they have but also fully conscious of the personal position they take in the retelling. With high school students this process can be made conscious.
One way of doing this in grade 9, for example, is developing a questionnaire with students to harvest the lived experiences of the oldest people they know and then analyse what this tells us both about social life in the past (spanning perhaps 3 generations and sometimes more) but it also shows the students that people’s history is very selective and subjective. Thus, they learn through direct experience respectfully to work with lived experiences in an interpretive way. Obviously, this only reaches back 70 years or more, but is shows that the further back in history we go the more we have to interpret the fragments left behind. In grade 10, when we look at pre-history, the students learn the amazing ways in which evidence can be gathered and interpreted, including how the expectations of the scientists involved colour their conclusions. Were the Neanderthals brutal, subhuman primitives or was Ralph Solecki’s ‘first flower people’ (1971) interpretation of the finds made in the Shanidar Cave in Kurdistan, closer to reality? Thus, the students learn to discern and make judgements. In fact, the process of making aesthetic judgements is central to both methods.
Symptomatology in the humanities involves an interpretative approach, in which the phenomena are not simply given, as a plant, animal bone or geological formation is, but rather first has to be generated. We need to make poem come alive from the printed page and ‘hear’ it, a play needs to be performed, a novel has to draw us into its imaginative sphere, we have to visualize a historical situation, and then we can let it work on us and only then can we start to relate to it and say what it means. Whilst we try to interpret what the significance of the phenomenon, ‘hear’ what it has to say, this does not mean that there is an objective ‘hidden’ reality waiting to be revealed, a secret code waiting to be decoded, so that we can say, “this is the true meaning of this phenomenon”.
In short symptomatology is an approach to phenomena in the world of humanities and culture that requires a method that does tell the students (or teachers) what to think and how to respond (let alone with the aim of testing them), but in which the triad teacher-student-phenomenon become transparent for each other and therefore capable of transformation. It is not just, as is often thought, set up to reveal some important process going on: “look at this work of art, it is a symptom of some kind of significant stage of consciousness” or “this work of arts signifies a major new stage in the evolution of consciousness”.
Using a structured interpretative approach has levels of engagement, starting with description, then moving on to analysis and contextualizing and finally moves to understanding transactional effect (how does engaging with this phenomenon change me, change the way I see it and how does it change the meaning of the phenomenon?).
WPA: The method is also based on Steiner’s theory of knowledge for the cultural sciences  but requires a specific schooling to develop the intuitive faculties. This means that we should be very cautious simply adopting interpretations from anthroposophical authors….
Good Waldorf practice: the Waldorf approach to the arts and humanities is all about learning discernment and judgement in the field of the humanities and involves three basic phases. The first is experiencing language, history and art in context. The second is learning to discern the qualities of the phenomena (different word types, different text types, different literary genres, different cultures at different times, different artistic media). The third involves hermeneutic interpretation and analysis, including transactional responses.
Art appreciation/aesthetics
What is sometimes referred to as art history in Waldorf schools is an aspect of the symptomatic cultural-historical curriculum. However, for many years I have taught art appreciation, in which the focus is less on the history of art periods and the sequence of styles, which given its almost limitless range of its content often tends to the encyclopedic iteration of art periods and famous artists, which inevitably remains largely Eurocentric and is often highly suggestive of a teleological evolution of consciousness.
The approach I prefer could be described as art appreciation, which like cultural appreciation does not try to impose a particular structure of meaning on any given work of art of culture. This involves a lengthy contemplative approach to the work of art, ideally as the original in an art gallery. This is often enhanced by making drawings and sketches of the work and by enacting the gestures and movements of the figures in a painting or sculpture, in order to achieve a greater embodiment of the forms. This is followed by a subsequent recall of the picture, a sharing of impressions and how what subjective response each participant has. There follows clarification of details by revisiting a reproduction, including the identification of artefacts, the motive and its cultural references (e.g. the Bible story behind a Christian image, or the ancient myth that the picture was inspired by), a discussion of techniques and materials. This is followed by a biographical and cultural contextualizing of the artist and the picture. This process may take a week with a single painting (with reference perhaps to other works of the same artistic or other artists).
Aesthetics is the study of how art works and how it affects us. The basis for aesthetic appreciation is rich sensory experience or aisthetic experience in all fields of artistic medium, line, colour, shape, form, tone, melody, movement and so on, that children gain in the lower and middle school. An important aspect of experiencing sensory qualities is learning how to express these in language, finding words to describe the qualities. Later , in the high school, we build on this basic aesthetic education to interpret art.
As in other areas of the curriculum, some Waldorf teachers have imported Steiner’s ideas about art and literature into their teaching. Steiner gave many lectures of his interpretation of art and the lives of artists. These are interesting, as are other interpretations of art (such as Herbert Read’s The Meaning of Art (1931), Ernst Gombrich’s The Story of Art (1950), or indeed David Hockney’s Secret Knowledge: Rediscovering the lost techniques of Old Masters (2006)), but they are not definitive interpretations that need to be taught. Steiner’s ideas may be inspirations for teachers to work with and should not simply be passed on to students as fact.
This mode of appreciation blends an initial embodied phenomenological approach with a subsequent ‘symptomatic’ or rather hermeneutic approach and thus forms a third Waldorf method. Aesthetics or art appreciation differs from art history because its main purpose is to teach students how to ‘read’ or interpret art in a hermeneutic way, which is about developing ways of seeing, rather than categorizing art into periods and styles. These aspects are interesting and may be seen as part of cultural history, revealing aspects of particular historical periods and cultures and offering ways of seeing how human consciousness has changed over time and across geographical space. Like all attempts to periodize human culture and history, we have to be careful not to impose external, including anthroposophical, models of cultural evolution, especially those that suggest a hierarchical higher development and a fixed teleology. History and the history of consciousness may manifest certain trends, such as towards individualization and emancipation of the person in relation to social, cultural, religious or economic ideologies and systems, but this does not mean that the ‘outcomes’ or ‘goals’ of history are fixed and predetermined.
WPA: “The art of weighing and measuring qualities—colors, tones, forms, words, and gestures—
is a process in which the artist is constantly engaged. In fact, we are all doing this, artist
or not, all the time. This weighing up of qualities is what Aristotle considered to be a
virtuous, moral-building faculty: “Virtue is the human capacity, aided by skill and reason,
to determine between the too little and the too much.” In Rudolf Steiner’s terms this
faculty for virtue is referred to as moral imagination and ethical individualism (The
Philosophy of Spiritual Activity). Just as the words art and heart literally intertwine, so
too the artistic process and the development of cognitive feeling or heart thinking are
interrelated and even synonymous” from Van James, The aesthetic logic of the heart: Forming heart thinking.
Good Waldorf practice: Students learn how to describe the qualities that works of art in many media reveal, the techniques used and the way that they convey meaning. This ability builds on rich aisthetic or sensory experience of primary media such as colour, line, shape and form, 2 and 3 dimensions and perspectives. They learn these in the lower and middle school and so art appreciation or aesthetics as described here is basically an activity for the high school.
Performance
The cognitive-affective path to knowing through knowing and knowledge is balanced by the path of artistic doing or performance. Whilst knowledge is bound up with literacy, performance is a form of orality, which includes gesture, communication through movement (Eurythmy and dance) as ways of conveying meaning, speech, spoken poetry, performed drama and music. Poetry is literacy on the page, just as music is literacy in notation, but performed, spoken, sung, played or enacted is orality and lives in the moment. At its highest levels, performance is both intuitive and transformative for performer and audience. As Ulrich Kaiser (2020) has shown, Rudolf Steiner’s lectures were performative and he was evidently able to transport his listeners and audience into other states of consciousness, though unlike a demagogue, this left them free to follow or not. Just like a great actor on stage or a virtuoso musician, Steiner was able to move his audience in profound ways, that also changed them. This, therefore, is a path of knowing. Just like watching a Eurythmy performance – as Steiner mentioned on numerous occasions – has an impact of the audience that works on long after the performers have left the stage but also of course for the performers. He referred, for example, in the highly significant lecture from 21st September 1920 in Stuttgart (Steiner, 1982), to the effect of doing Eurythmy and watching it. The performers have transformed their bodies into receptive organs for spiritual knowledge; the audience’s capacity for spiritual sensibility is heightened through the internalization of the movements- today we would say, be the activity of their mirror neurons, through which the sense of movement is linked with the higher senses of word and thought.
Waldorf education lays particular emphasis on performance throughout the curriculum and across the grades. Not only do children recite poems and perform Eurythmy and drama, but there is a strong emphasis on presenting what has been learned (or is being learned). Waldorf students, by the time they leave school are accomplished performs and presenters. This is not a superficial skill, but a form of knowing- as well as demonstrating understanding. With each performance the person’s knowledge and skills grow in the act of performing and after important performances the effect on their development can be powerful.
A variation of performance involves making and doing in the context of learning a practical activity such as craft work or some form of work (e.g. gardening) using a crafting approach (Graves and Code, 2019) This involves sourcing materials locally, understanding the qualities of materials and tools and their cultural and ecological origins, in order to make useful artefacts. The immersion on the materials, tools and techniques of making involve the assimilation of values (i.e. the values of crafting), cultural values, connection to the environment and meeting human need. Learning through doing in context involves processes of dwelling. The core idea of crafting is that the practices of transforming materials and understanding their context, transform the person doing and making.
In my work on potentialities (Rawson, 2024, 2026) I have shown that the basic gesture and activity of the spiritual core of being- the Self- manifests as the will to engage with and communicate with the world. This expresses itself in the primary activities of directing attention, reaching out, touching, and sensing and perceiving and these transform into all modes of communicating, doing and making.
Performative learning
Waldorf education should be the classic example of performative learning. When one considers how often students perform poems, songs, pieces of music, plays, hold speeches, Waldorf students become seasoned performers. But the concept of the performative is much broader than this traditional notion of going on stage. Waldorf second language learning is largely performative because it has to do with using the language in meaningful situations. The first three classes are entirely performative because they are entirely oral and this includes gestures and play acting. Literacy can be performative too as soon as the students can use the language to be creative, or to use it to fulfil meaningful tasks.
Embodied learning is the most fundamental learning we can do because it uses the whole human being, actions, gestures accompanied by emotions and ideas. We are so verbal and later so fixed on literacy and intellectual things that we forget the importance of embodied learning. Putting complex ideas into gesture, movement, graphics, drawings, forms and other non-verbal forms of expression involves the whole human being.
One of the ways in which learning can be experiential is if it involves performative activities. Performative in this sense does not necessarily mean performing to an audience. What it definitely involves however is doing something bodily as if to an audience. We know from foreign language teaching that enacting a situation makes it much easier to understand in another language and this is true of many fields. The doing can involve role play and enacting, or finding gestures to accompany a text (poem or historical text), movements to express relationships (e.g. enacting the past, present and future tenses by taking up positions in space and moving them, or demonstrating where prepositions are). Children can be very expressive when asked to show what they feel when they see a particular colour or shape or tone (is it rising or falling, stretching out, or being punctuated tact or rhythmic or melodic?). This also includes building models, for example of landscapes, river valleys, mountains, houses, people or animals. Puppets can be used to narrate stories and of course dance and eurythmy are performative ways of expressing music, texts, emotions or relationships.
Performative learning always involves embodying ideas, relationships and giving them gesture and movement, which engages and integrates the whole person, mind, psyche and body. This is by no means restricted to younger children but applies in the high school and even adult education.
Roleplay is part of performative learning methods and can span a number of activities at different ages. It can be playing shops in a foreign language lesson, with cut-out fruit and vegetables and set dialogue; “good morning Mr Singh. What do you have today on your stall?” “A good day to you Mrs Brown, how are your children? Today we have some lovely sweet and rosy apples at a good price”. “They do look tasty.” “Would you like to try a slice?” “Oh yes, very tasty. I’ll take a kilo please”…etc. Roleplay can also involve going for a job interview, debating, making a newspaper and so on, in which situations and interactions are played through. There is a fine line between simulation, such as practising conducting interviews and then transcribing them into an article, and actually making a newspaper, which is printed with correct layout and pictures. The more real and authentic the simulation, the better in terms of how seriously the students take the task and thus the degree to which they identify with the tasks.
WPA: Through performance the will comes directly to expression, whilst drawing on thinking and feeling. Through performance the person is changed because of the embodiment process. During the performance, the student’s skills and knowledge can be integrated into a new level of capability, quite apart from the sense of self-efficacy that the performer may have through the enacting.
Good Waldorf practice: life in a Waldorf school is punctuated by multiple opportunities for performance, within the lessons and classroom, on the stage for parents and guests, at seasonal festivals, in public.
Crafting (doing art and crafts)
A variation of performance involves making and doing in the context of learning a practical activity such as craft work or some form of work (e.g. gardening) using a crafting approach (Graves and Code, 2019). This involves sourcing materials locally, understanding the qualities of materials and tools and their cultural and ecological origins, in order to make useful artefacts. The immersion on the materials, tools and techniques of making involve the assimilation of values (i.e. the values of crafting), cultural values, connection to the environment and meeting human need. Learning through doing in context involves processes of dwelling. The core idea of crafting is that the practices of transforming materials and understanding their context, transform the person doing and making. Crafting is practiced in handwork, crafts and doing practical art including painting with different materials, drawing and graphic work, modelling and sculpture, eurythmy and dance, making music. There are preparatory exercises in all these art forms but crafting in the sense I use here (one could also coin the term arting) involves creativity in producing something of meaning in various media using primary materials to bring experiences and ideas to expression. I sometimes feel that too much time in art teaching copying and not enough allowing students to create and express their thoughts, feelings and intentions. Of course, all such activities require an apprenticeship in learning the qualities of materials and tools also study works by masters and learning about the different genres and modes of expression. I have just been studying a book on the motifs in Northwest Indigenous Art (from the West Coast of the US and Canada), which not only explains the principles of this fascinating at attractive art form, which shows how a fairly limited range of shapes and motifs in two- and three-dimensional art forms can be developed into great originality and expressiveness, adopting modern techniques such as silkscreen to produce astonishing works of art that remain true to a very specific cultural heritage. Learning about such art- especially in schools in the region- can be particularly formative for young people to experience. One cannot cover all art styles and the cultures that produced them; it is more a question of the value of deep dives into a few of them. In an age of instant forms of production, unpacking one field can reveal the unlimited sources of human creativity and connectivity to their environment.
Because crafting is embedded in the geographical and cultural context the school is located in, it makes sense wherever possible to use local materials and the handicrafts related to them and that the students gradually learn the historical ecological, economic and cultural significance of these materials. This involves an integrated curriculum in which subjects like crafts, gardening, biology and history work together to show how human being transform their environment in positive (and unfortunately also negative) ways and in so doing transform themselves.
In my work on potentialities (Rawson, 2024, 2026) I have shown that the basic gesture and activity of the spiritual core of being- the Self- manifests as the will to engage with and communicate with the world. This expresses itself in the primary activities of directing attention, reaching out, touching, and sensing and perceiving and these transform into all modes of communicating, doing and making. I believe this new field of potentialities can provide teachers with a way of understanding how children and young people learn and therefore how they should be taught.
WPA: Practical work and crafts school the will and this schools the thinking and refines feeling. Doing and making useful and things well is meaningful and enhances sense of coherence. The core idea of crafting is that engaging with the world using embodied and knowledgeable skills transforms the materials, the environment and the person.
Good Waldorf practice: We offer as many local craft traditions as possible and integrate these into the whole curriculum.
Experiential learning
In a sense much of Waldorf education involves experiential learning because of the basic assumption that learning depends on us having rich experiences that make an impression on us and affect us. We make connections to these experiences and derive knowledge from them. Many of these experiences are direct when we see, touch something or do something, but many of them come about because we are told about them in such a way that we are deeply affected by what we hear and the mental images we form relating to what we have been told. This is more than simply transmitting information. Someone can tell me that there are such things as volcanoes, but if they describe an eruption in graphic detail, this is more likely to leave an impression. Reconstructing volcanic activity in the classroom is difficult and dangerous, though we could demonstrate thermal activity such as boiling mud and geysers by boiling porridge and watch the explosive force of the bubbles (at a safe distance).  We have to work much harder to affect children and young people by simply showing them things and we make even less impression when we show them pictures, though a video film of a volcanic eruption can be quite dramatic. Other geological processes, such as river courses can be simulated, by pouring water into a large sand tray, and even plate tectonics can be imagined better if we arrange something like a rugby scrum, with two groups pushing against each, or ocean currents, or the movements of sun, moon and planets by moving around a large space outdoors or in the gym.
Experiential learning starts in kindergarten and is an important feature in the lower grades, particularly in the informal mode of learning, such as, going for walks in the surroundings in all weathers, and discussing what has been experienced afterwards. Harvesting wild fruit, collecting leaves, climbing trees, learning to cross busy urban streets, preparing and serving food, and the rich social processes in a class are all experiential learning opportunities. These experiences really become valuable, however, when they are recalled, shared and put into words and pictures. Experiential learning does not happen automatically – being given an experience is not sufficient, nor is mindlessly recording it. Experiential learning involves moving between action and reflection, thinking and feeling.
Experiential learning can be direct, or indirect through media or narrative, and in fact we often need to combine all three methods if the students are to have a learning experience.
Good Waldorf practice: experiential learning is essentially ‘Waldorf’, though the experiences need to be worked through in age-appropriate and developmental ways.
Activity-based learning
Experiential learning is closely related to activity-oriented learning, which refers to learning opportunities that are based on students doing something (usually bodily rather than only cognitively) from which they learn. There are a number of assumptions behind this kind of learning, which it is worth drawing attention to. Activity based learning assumes that:
transformative learning always involves head, hands and heart, that is, the whole person,
activity-based learning stimulates the self-activity of the students,
children and young people are basically curious to learn about the world and to know how this relates to them,
the students’ subjective interests are more likely to be aligned with intended learning outcomes, if they are shown how to do something rather simply told that it exists,
activities confront learners with real, objective facts, challenges and problems, and thus with objective realities (e.g. once we have cut the material or wood, we can’t easily repair it if the measurement was wrong),
encountering real problems means encountering subjective prejudices, inner resistances, likes and dislikes,
students want to become capable and gain more autonomy over their learning (though they may initially be uncertain and insecure and want the learning outcome to be guaranteed- “tell me what I should think and feel”),
activity by definition, involves a greater involvement in the environment that only meeting representations of the world (in images or texts),
traditional understandings of learning overlook or underestimate the importance of activity-based learning.
There is a subtle transition from general experiential learning to more focused activity-based learning. Perhaps the difference is that opportunities for experience are already there (e.g. in nature, in social life), whereas activities (for activity-based learning) are designed and constructed for the purpose of learning. Typical activities include handwork, crafts, cooking, cleaning, roleplay and simulation (which we discuss below). As long as the activity is something that needs doing and that children enjoy doing and has not just been thought up to keep them occupied (e.g. when you have to take on a class at very short notice- which is primarily a learning experience for the teacher), then activity learning is a rich source of learning.
Good Waldorf practice: creating opportunities for learning through practical activities, especially when the activities relate to real needs (e.g., cooking, craft work, handwork, gardening, housekeeping activities, organizing events and making a poster or programme for the event) are rich sources of learning.
A developmental view of methods
Given the developmental nature of Waldorf education, it is necessary to take a developmental perspective on teaching methods.  One of the most important methods in Waldorf education is social learning, that is, learning that occurs in a social context such a learning community. A learning community is a group of people who share many experiences together in a community of practice. This means they share a learning content, countless common experiences, a curriculum, a group of teachers and a particular school culture with many routines, rituals, lesson structures and organizational structures (such as the main lesson, class teachers etc.), ways of learning, ways of speaking and interacting. Such communities provide the basis for learning, generating shared meanings, relationships, identities and development. The Waldorf curriculum is a community of practice or rather a field of practice in itself because it shapes the learning of individuals and groups and, as we have seen, prompts development. Individuals learn through various forms of participation, which are developmental. Within a learning community more competent others (students or teachers) scaffold new members learning so that they can quickly fully participate in the learning practices.
In Waldorf early years children learn through participation in the full sense. The learning community provides them with meaningful practices, which they are free to join in and emulate. Once the child’s formative forces have reached a certain level of development within the child’s organism, some of these forces become available for learning and the nature of learning changes from voluntary participation to guided participation. The teachers guide the learning processes in an intentional way, which is necessary because many things cannot be simply picked up by watching and joining in, such as writing, reading and mathematics (and much besides). The children learn to learn in a community of learners and after puberty and above all in the high school, the students learn in communities of inquiry. What is interesting about this perspective is that it is not successive, with later modes of learning replacing earlier ones, but rather the primary modes are retained. We continue to be part of communities of practice through participation in many areas of life and we continue to learn how to learn. We can show this overall model in the following graphic.
Figure 7 Learning in communities of practice modifies over the life course in school
We can now take a closer look at the way the methods of teaching change over the course of the 12 years of schooling in Waldorf education.
Methods through the grades
Classes 1-2
In the transition to school, the primary difference in the methods involves deliberate in the context of guided participation. The emphasis in instruction (“this is how we do this”) is on the ‘guided’ aspect. Following a period of warming up and attuning (see Chapter 5 steps of learning), this means frontal teaching for those parts of the lesson in which instruction, often with the use of the board.  In order to make the transition from early years participation in practical activities, the life processes of the child have to be directed towards using symbols to represent qualities (the letters, numbers and punctuation marks etc.) and toward deliberate recall of previous experiences. Steiner advised that in order not to weaken the life processes with too much abstraction, concrete activities (form drawing using the whole body), images and stories should be used to introduce the letters. This was only intended to bridge the transition, it was not intended as the predominant method for the whole of the first class, let alone the second class. In particular, it is necessary to build a bridge between orality and literacy using images that capture in some way the gesture of the spoken sound in graphic form.
Text box
It is necessary to build a bridge between orality and literacy using images that capture in some way the gesture of the spoken sound in graphic form.
In alphabetical languages children quickly need to learn the relationship between sounds in a single syllable and letters used to represent these (English has many diphthongs, combinations of vowels that represent certain sounds). Once children have been shown that words are constructed using letters that have particular forms, starting with cursive, lower case and then adding the capital letters and even familiarity with printed letter forms, they can move in a matter of fact way to acquiring all the letter (or number and arithmetical processes) so that they can quickly write and read words and by the end of class 1, they should be able to write their own sentences describing their experiences. Steiner’s idea was that handwriting should flow fluently, which means he favoured the cursive or joined-up style of writing. In German all nouns are written with capital letters, so it was necessary to teach the children how the capital letters are formed as well, otherwise they would learn to write incorrectly. He also emphasized the phonetic element of the relationship between the letters, combinations or letter and phonemes. In German, this is much simpler than in other languages like English.
For various reasons, Waldorf class teachers have drawn this process out over two and three years.  This significantly slows down their acquisition of the constrained skills of literacy, writing and reading (and number gnomes detract from the understanding of the actual processes), whilst offering no obvious benefits. Children are ready to learn and want to get on with establishing their constrained skills. In an interview Christof Wiechert, former leader of the Pedagogical Section at the Goetheanum, explained why Steiner intended the learning of reading, writing and arithmetic to be done in a ‘sober’, matter-of-fact way. He was asked what this might look like and replied,
Sober looks like you really teach, that you are in a process of a higher speed of learning than is done now. I have seen main lessons where the real teaching takes three minutes out of 120, or classes in America where they did the alphabet the whole first year. That is because of this misunderstood gesture that everything has to be wrapped with imagination. But, if you bring too much imagination, the children get fuzzy. The archetype is that the alphabet is done around Christmas of the first year and then the reading and writing starts. Steiner said that you should teach out of the reality of life, and so you would use endless comparisons, but you are not building artificial worlds of dwarfs and whatever in the first three grades.
Historically there has been some confusion about the requirement to activate the imagination and that the lessons should be artistic. Addressing the children through the imagination means that they can visualize and emotionally respond to images they are given, using their new powers to form mental images at will, rather than giving them abstract instructions. However, this does not mean that they shouldn’t learn the letter and numbers, because they need these to express their imagination in their writing and to be able decode text into inner images in their imagination when reading.
Being artistic is not a matter of using art methods like drawing and painting. It means that the composition and arrangement of the whole lesson needs to have an artistic structure like a piece of music or a novel, with an underlying theme and mood, with alternating periods of ‘breathing in and out’, that is, phases of quiet listening, phases of active doing, solo moments and choral moments, building up to a crescendo, or dramatic moment, resolving the tension, alternating between visual, auditory, gestural qualities and so on. This structuring of activities is the cultural, artistic equivalent to the cycles in nature and it requires not nature to guide it but a human Self in harmony with the class as a learning community. This way the students don’t get tired or bored and the lesson has that magic ingredient, flow. This energizes students and teachers.
Recent research in Germany  has shown the true intentions of Steiner’s original references to early literacy and two experienced teachers introduced a new model of introducing writing and reading following Steiner’s indications and positively evaluated the outcomes. On her website Renewal of Literacy Jennifer Militzer-Koppel, explains that in her learning support work in Waldorf schools she noticed that many children in Waldorf schools showed weak reading fluency, weak letter knowledge of lower-case letters, weak sound-symbol knowledge for vowels, weak decoding skills and weak phonemic awareness. Her approach makes a number of recommendations, we would like to endorse (though we don’t always agree with her terminology- we would prefer the terms providing learning opportunity to ‘training’), including individualizing literacy work within the main lesson, continuing literacy work throughout the year in all main lesson blocks (since they all use writing and most use reading), the direct teaching of phonemic awareness, symbol imagery and concept imagery.
The methods in first two class establish the learning habits for the period until puberty. They teach the children how to attend, when necessary, how to work together with others in groups, how to stand before the class as an individual and speak and how the classes inwardly supports this, and above all the task is to establish secure constrained skills in autonomous writing (i.e. not simply copying), reading and arithmetic.
We appreciate that different languages require different approaches to learning and take longer or shorter to establish constrained skills. Learning to write and read in Mandarin, for example, takes longer and cannot be taught in the same way as a language with an alphabet. Chinese colleagues are working on appropriate Waldorf methods, fine tuning the process, but to some extent, were hampered initially by Western mentors who showed them the way the letter are taught, for example in English of German, in many cases, in ways that we have just criticised above!  The generative principles for any language, we feel can be framed as follows.
Figure 8 The basic steps in establishing literacy
In general, once the teacher has introduced the activity (singing a song, playing a piece of the flute, speaking a verse or poem, a movement or coordination exercise, using water colour paints, a form drawing), the children can practice in quartets or pairs and later perform this to the class. This establishes the basis for subsequent self-directed practicing and learning. Likewise, the teacher can start by leaving the children to work without direct supervision for brief periods (the teacher sits quietly or watches the class through an open door or window) and gradually extends these periods so they get used to working without the teacher’s close guidance and presence. In abstract terms, the method moves between direct instruction, guided participation and self-directed (though supervised) participation.
Text box
We follow the teacher, we do things together, we can do things in groups and even on our own.
Classes 3-4-5
In these grades, we consolidate the constrained skills of writing, reading through practice and raising language phenomena to consciousness and in using numbers by becoming of the basic rules and applying them consciously. In literacy this means developing awareness for the different qualities of verbs, nouns and their adverbs, adverbial phrases (how, when, where etc.) and adjectives. In grade four this emphasis turns to the distinctions between the different tenses (time) and space (prepositions). The children are not taught these because they don’t know how to use them, but in order to awaken awareness for the use of language and how it structures how we relate to the world and other people. In arithmetic, children learn the units of measurement of time, space and quantity and quantity and apply these in practical activities (handicraft work, building etc.). In grade four fractions are introduced. Here the principle of using an image as prompt to open up the phenomenon and then moving to symbols is applied, as in the letters in the first class.
There is a strong emphasis on practical learning by doing with the activities contextualized by narrative (e.g. the story of people in traditional communities) and by embodied activities, such as demonstrating the tenses of the verbs or meaning of prepositions through spatial positioning in the room and movement in space (e.g., in, on, around, near, at the corner). This is followed by the transition from actual positions to metaphorical positions (e.g. around three o’clock, in time, on time, a guess is close to the target or further away etc.). Once the children have grasped a concept, they can make up their own sentence examples, and then use these skills in their writing across all subjects (e.g. farming, house building, stories from ancient cultures, home surroundings, etc.). In maths they can practice what they have learned and create their own example sums to be solved.
Even though puberty may start (in girls a year or more earlier than boys) we use the emancipated life processes as much as possible to learn vocabulary (including spelling of various words groups), poems, songs and number bonds and times tables by heart through repetition with variation as much as possible (there are actually no limits) in these grades. Recall should be narrative and comprehensive (what happened?) and limited only by the time spent doing it (e.g. up to 15 minutes) in pair work, in small groups, with occasional presentations to the class. Class performances at festivals are always helpful for motivation. This stretches and exercises the powers of memory and reinforces basic structures of knowledge.
In abstract terms the learning moves quickly from the teacher highlighting a phenomenon, making it experiential, identifying the concept and its terminology, applying and practicing.
Text box
We can apply what we learn and create our own tasks and do our own work.
Classes 6-9
Following puberty, which has wide ranging effects on the bodily, psychological and spiritual sides of the young person’s being, we need to modify our methods to take account of these changes. It might help to look at these areas separately but bear in mind that they always work together and flow into one another.
Physical implications. The growth and maturation of the bones, sinews and muscles means that young people have more physical strength for practical work (e.g. gardening and sport) but also that they have a need to relate to the principles of mechanics (e.g. levers etc.). There are many hormonal changes resulting in new psychological behaviours and changes in the neural architecture, which impact learning.
Psychological. The hormonal changes and awakening interest in sexuality are well known and need to be taken account of in the content we offer students in this age group. This, of course, doesn’t just start with hormones, but with the powerful suggestive force of all kinds of media that signal certain behaviours, attitudes to sexuality, idealized body shapes and so on to children and young people. We can complement these with realistic and healthy expectations, indirectly through story material but also directly in discussing such matters in class. The term healthy here would mean, for example, gender appropriate role models in stories, myths and legends, but also actual biographical models. Gender and relationship education needs to begin much earlier than in traditional Waldorf approaches.
Following puberty, the brain undergoes a major phase of reorganization, leading to a ‘pruning’ of synaptic connections. Essentially, this means a loss of much detail but the retention of basic structures. The implication of this is that up until puberty, children need to have learned basic dispositions, constrained skills, ways of seeing and processing experiences. After puberty, young people need to learn less through guided participation (though this continues) and more through experience in the world together with structured reflection. This means making accurate observations of natural phenomena, finding language to describe these, drawing conclusions using thinking, logic and ideas of causality on the basis of sensory experience.
At the same time, they need multiple opportunities to have rich cultural experiences (art, literature, music, history, languages) and finding their own words to describe the qualities they experience in these. Of course, teachers need to draw their attention to technical aspects (how to read a picture, piece of music, how to analyse the stylistic devices in a text, how to draw conclusions from historical data). In practical subjects, they also learn to appreciate the qualities of materials, the tools and techniques required to produce and work with them (always including the historical, cultural and ecological context). They need rich experiences in the world (through field trips, practical and performances) guided by experts (either specialist subject teachers or actual experts who are not teachers).
This should form the basis for the third essential method, creative working. Using the skills in observation and analysis they have learned students need plenty of opportunities to apply those skills creatively in producing their own explorations of the world in science, artist production in drama, writing, music and the other arts. In all these activities they need criteria for minimum expectations, regular formative feedback and interventions, and appreciative summative assessment.
The best methods in this period include group and individual project work, field work, practical work meeting real needs in the community, performance.
Text box
We like to have a say in what we learn, and we appreciate some guidance from experts.
Classes 10 to 12
In the high school the approach is primarily scientific in the conventional rather than Goethean sense, both in the sciences and humanities. This does rule out the Goethean approach but usually it is necessary to teach the students to work in a scientific way, also using the formular, terminology and theories dominant in the sciences. This does not have to be done uncritically, and it is perfectly acceptable to point out the limitations of the theory used in mainstream school science, though since we are preparing them for life in the actual world, including studying science, engineering, medicine and so on, at university, Waldorf students should not be kept away from conventional science. In the humanities we use the same intellectually rigorous, thought-provoking interpretive methods used in the best mainstream schools at this level, that goes beyond memorizing facts. It also means taking a critical stance when it comes to the racist and gendered positions of part generations.   Literature, history or art need to be both understood in their original context but also from today’s perspective.
Organization
The way we organize learning can support (or hinder) the process. This section looks at the ways in which learning can be organized. In a way, the school timetable is a method of influencing learning, just as block teaching makes a huge different to the quality of the learning experience. Having certain activities in the morning or afternoon makes a difference not only to those activities but to the student’s experience over the whole day. However, the traditional idea that the school day should be structured to reflect the threefold nature of the human being is an unhelpful over-simplification. The following table shows how this sometimes structured.
This model assumes that the (main) morning lesson is essentially head work, which is a misunderstanding, since the whole 90 or 120 minutes needs to be structured with a range of activities. In the high school there is certainly more cognitive work, but this also needs to be meaningfully structured with phases of discussion, presentation, group work, individual work and so on. It makes naïve assumptions about the nature of so-called subject or track lessons, which are not necessarily of a ‘feeling’ nature. The evidence from many schools is that block teaching in second languages shows that two or three 45-minute lessons a week is a very ineffective way of learning a language. The natural way to learn a language requires immersion in the language and this cannot be done in this fragmented way. The organization of learning is always constrained but the planning should start with what furthers and what hinders learning.
Good Waldorf practice: Organize the teaching using the following priorities:
What supports the real learning process?
How does this fit into the overall organization of the lessons?
Practicalities such as availability of teachers, rooms and spaces, overall structure of the timetable.
External requirements.
Adaptable classroom arrangements
It has been shown in a number of studies  have shown that the seating arrangements (particularly in primary age classes) have a significant impact of learning, depending of the educational, aims, the learning activities and style of teaching. The seating arrangements and learning aims have to be consistent. There is no doubt that the traditional rows of desks facing the blackboard and teacher’s desk is best suited to direct instruction, demonstrations, when all students require the same information at the same time. Single seating in rows facing forwards limits students’ possibilities for talking to their neighbours and thus for concentration and focus on the teacher. Some teachers feel that frontal rows enable students to concentrate, but as most of us recall from our school time, sitting in the back rows enables disengagement and distance from what is happening ‘up there’. Students who need more help benefit if they are in the first row closest to the teacher. The traditional arrangement also favours cognitive tasks that require students to think for themselves and it makes interactions between students inconvenient. Frontal rows usually make it necessary for the teacher to determine the seating plan, partly to separate students who like to chat with each other, have challenging students near to hand and to have a strong group of active participants filling up the middle.
If, however, exchange and students talking to each other is the aim, then clusters of desks is more favourable. Clusters are best for group work and collaboration (including sharing things such as paints or craft materials) and when looking at the board or screen is important (though for short periods students are perfectly capable of turning in their seats wherever they are sitting. Clusters are good for examining specimens that are relatively small, or station work where groups of students move from task to task (or specimen to specimen). Clearly, clusters enhance collaboration, student exchange and talk.
A variation of this arrangement is so-called expert groups and home groups (also referred to as the jigsaw puzzle method, since the separate pieces are added to complete the whole picture. The experts have information they have prepared, and the home groups send envoys to each expert group to gather the specific information and then relay this back to the home group who then integrate into an overall picture. This takes some organization and practice, but once mastered can be highly effective in stimulating deep learning about a given field.
The ‘Socratic circle’ involves two concentric circles of desks. The inner circle actively debates a particular topic and the outer circle observes (also known as ‘fish bowl’). The teacher can sit in the outer circle. This arrangement prompts interaction and discussion with a focus on the students. A ‘hot seat’ can be identified and students from the outer circle can swap seats with the hot heat student and thus join in the debate (until someone else comes from the outer circle and claims the hot seat).
A flexible seating arrangement includes other types of seating, such as a sofa, bean bag, cushions, ‘coffee tables’ to allow students to take turns sitting in informal places. The majority of desks are still traditional, but these alternatives allow for individual students to take time out or simply sit in a more relaxed way. It is thought that have such options gives students a sense of choice and autonomy, and this has been confirmed by a couple of recent studies.A variation of this is that some students sit on kinesthetic seats such as bouncy balls, which require them to exercise their sense of balance whilst maintaining a constant but gentle rhythmical movement. This may help students who find it hard to sit still.
The new Waldorf idea, though it did not originate in Waldorf, is the so-called ‘moving classroom’ (another translation from German- bewegte Klasse) for the first two grades. A better term would be adaptable furniture classroom.
Figure 9 This shows a classroom with adaptable furniture in grade 1. The children kneel on the cushions when working at their desks. Notice that the room also has stools for those who wish to use them. (Photo courtesy of Adazi School in Latvia)
Figure 10 These two drawings show ways in which the adaptable furniture can be stacked and arranged to make a balancing and climbing apparatus. Drawing by Justin Knight.
The adaptable furniture allows the young children to sit or kneel on cushions whilst writing or drawing, which is good for their posture and the benches are wide enough for large main lesson or drawing books. The desks can be turned over and used for balancing or stacked for climbing on can be stacked quickly at the side of the room to allow space for movement. The cushions, which are made by the new class 1 parents to a model provided by the school can be square of round and are filled with grain (usually rye or rice) and lavender (with silica bags to absorb moisture). The furniture is made in the wood workshop of the Kassel Waldorf School, which has a branch in the high school with professional trainings (in wood, metal, catering and social pedagogy) and is also made in some sheltered workshops in communities working with adults with disabilities. The research carried out in Germany confirms the advantages of the adaptable furniture, especially when combined by a holistic school morning in which specialist subject teachers (eurythmy, second languages, handwork) come into the classroom at prearranged times but from the perspective of the class into the flow of the learning setting. That means there is no fixed timetables with changing teachers, but rather a learning morning in which a team of adults support the children in various activities, or put another way, there is a four-hour rhythmically structured main lesson with different activities and ‘breaks’ for play and meals when needed. This is in effect an early years’ model though with guided participation and instruction. This provides a more fluid transition between kindergarten and school. The element of rhythm and flow are particularly helpful for many children, who lack real rhythms in their lives outside of school.
Good Waldorf practice: the classroom arrangements (furniture, colours, architecture, quality of light) are part of the learning environment. The arrangement should be determined by the pedagogical situation and the learning methods. Furniture is easier to arrange (and re-arrange) than architecture, and it must be fit for purpose. Teachers should experiment with what works best.
Specific methods
Different methods are used at different stages of the learning process, and these vary from subject to subject and are age-related. This example (with kind permission of Sibylla Hesse) of a lesson plan for a grade 10 history block (Origins and Early Human Cultures) shows how different topics require different methods of working by the students.
Note: Every day we take a brief look at current political topics (“warm-up”)
This plan for a 15-day main lesson block, assumes a wide range of different methods, tailored to the requirement of the questions posed. A plan for almost any other main lesson block would also shop the range of methods used and considerable flexibility in applying them.  What I now present are description of specific methods of learning. They are artificially presented as if they were stand alone. In reality, any given lesson will incorporate multiple methods with variations. The choice of a  method depends on what the aims of the lesson or block are.
In what follows I describe a range of specific methods that in one way or another incorporate the basic modalities described above.
Narrative /story telling
As mentioned several times already, narrative is probably the best means of activating the students’ imagination by stimulating their feelings and every teacher needs to be a good storyteller. Story telling is probably the most familiar of Waldorf methods and the curriculum includes a wide range of story material. Narrative is also used to convey experiences that are difficult or impossible to access directly What characterizes narrative?
It is essentially a form of orality, is performative, embodied, dialogic and collaborative, forming a relationship between storyteller and listeners.
Narrative aims to communicate a particular experience of the teller to the community of listeners in ways that are relevant to the circumstances. “Traces of the storyteller cling to the story the way the handprints of the potter cling to the clay vessel” (Walter Benjamin).
Story telling is a craft, in which experiences are given shape and meaning in useful and unique ways.
Stories help us to work out human intentions in real or possible worlds.
Sharing stories helps form communities of learners through social bonds.
Narrative aims to engage the imagination, empathy and identification of the participants.
Narratives have a coherent structure but keeps detail to a minimum (to allow scope for the listeners’ imagination).
Narratives can be interpreted.
Narrative conveys meaning and values and is therefore a form of knowing (storyknowing). Storyknowing is a cumulative process of building knowledge through exposure to many stories over the course of the spiral curriculum. Storyknowing does not claim unbiased access to the truth but offers situated knowledge.
They allow the storyteller scope for improvisation, emphasis and adaptation to the situation.
Stories are generally told rather than read because the connection between the story-teller and audience is more active. That means that teachers need to be able to remember story-lines. In order to support memory, it helpful in the preparation to structure the story into sections and most legends and folk tales have a strong inherent structure. For each section it may be helpful to write a few key words as a prompt in class. Some teachers find it helpful to visualize the structure of the story in a linear way, or as a cycle with the key stages highlighted in sequence on the circle.
Stories can and often must be modified. Except for texts that are considered sacred, all stories have always been modified to suit the interests and needs of the listeners. Even classics such as Aesops Fables or Grimms Fairy Tales (which anyway have been translated, and every translation is an interpretation) can be modified in the telling. Even the Grimm’s Brothers and Andrew Young re-wrote their stories to make them more suitable to particular audiences. Whilst it is true that the underlining structure of a folktale or legend should not be altered because it might undermine the integrity of the original meaning the actual wording is not sacrosanct. I take the view that archetypes in stories are not usually gender specific, and even if they present some aspect of femininity such as motherhood, for example, the nurturing, parental role is not exclusive to women. Qualities such as courage, strength, wisdom, beauty or honesty are not gender specific.
It is usually necessary to shorten stories, or to portion them into sections that can be spread over several lessons (each story time starting with a short recapitulation of the story so far). One can also embellish stories with details that might interest certain students or to engage them in a more direct way, or to provide background (geographical, cultural, historical, technical) detail to make the story more comprehensible.
Perhaps most significantly, stories can be modified responsibly, to remove sexist or racist elements or gender stereotypes or violence that are not appropriate for the pedagogical context. Since many traditional tales reflect the religious, cultural, sexual and political values of the people who collected them, we need to make sure we are not transported these in an un-reflected way. This is not merely a gesture of wokeness, as some conservative critics say- it is a pedagogical necessity given the values that Waldorf education stands for. It is essential that children hear stories involving strong, capable women, that people with different sexual orientations are normal (even if the society they live in does not accept them), that diversity is normal. The message is important for the majority and for the minority students in a class.
As I advised in my earlier article (Rawson, 2019), I believe the choice of narrative material should first anchor the children in the (multi)-cultural context the school is located in, whilst cultivating cosmopolitical intercultural awareness by choosing stories from many different cultures (often with brief cultural and geographical background information).  There is not a canon of stories that are inherent to Waldorf education but rather a loose structure of narrative genres that reflect different modes of consciousness and levels of psychological complexity. However, as Goethe’s fairy tale the Green Snake and the Beautiful Lily shows (and magical realism in modern novels or West Africa literature) fairy tales are not necessarily simple, whilst myths are more complex. Also, the distinction between children’s literature and adult literature is a modern phenomenon and to some extent artificial. Myths are not necessarily stories for children. The question is rather whether the effect of the story works unconsciously and when it is appropriate to reflect on stories in an analytic sense. Therefore, the question as to whether a story is age-appropriate is harder to answer than simplistic parallelisms that assume a specific level of conscious for a specific age (or Waldorf class). The fact is that mixed age groups of children and young people and adults happily listen to the same stories but relate to them in different ways.
If we assume that curriculum prompts developmental responses, rather than assuming that the students are at a particular level (because the norm is highly diverse), then we should ask what kind of response do we want children to have to the stories we tell? It helps to have a sense for the qualities of different narrative genres.
Each genre has what one might call a naïve dimension, which the listener simply assimilates and in a sense  emulates, but there is also a reflective dimension, when we talk and think about stories, how they are constructed, how they affect us, and stories have an interpretive dimension when we build on the affect they have, to analyse how this affect is achieved and to contextualize the story in relation to others to the culture they belong to, to the kind of consciousness they generate and are derived from. We can summarize this as follows, there are three levels of response to story,
Naïve participation
Affective, reflective
Interpretive.
From the other side, we can identify three levels of producing stories,
Retelling our experiences in story form,
Crafting a story (either orally or in text)
Performing story telling.
There are no clear demarcations between the difference genres of stories that come from an oral tradition, and most stories we have access to are already in literary form- only those we experience directly from oral sources can be seen as expressions of a genuine oral tradition, if the storyteller did not themselves get the story from, a written source. Many stories have elements of several genres, including drama (Shakespeare) and modern fantasy literature (Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter).
Tales of magic and transformation
Neither the people nor objects that inhabit folktales, fairy tales or tales of wonder are confined to the rules of materiality and logic; trees and frogs can talk, pots can produce porridge endlessly, brooms can sweep on their. Animals, plants and features of the landscape can demonstrate agency. The story is set in non-specific time in the past “once upon a time”. All such stories involve all kinds of transformation, which is why this genre is sometimes referred to as tales of magic and transformation. The images used in fairy tales often have culturally specific meanings, for example, the forest or the wood in fairy tale may be a place of evil and danger (many Middle European fairy tales/Märchen), or a place of light and liberation (English folktales such as Robin Hood).  Many magical tales are literary, meaning they have been composed by a specific author, though based on previously existing motifs. In fact, most fairy tales or magical tales have been written by someone (including Grimms). They may contain archetypes, though we should not assume their status is universal, since most are culturally specific, except that the themes of life, death, transformation, love, fear are probably common to all. We need to be particulary vigilant in interrogating the sources for the stories we tell. Older editions of collections or retellings often reflect out-of-date, colonial or racist interpretations. In Waldorf education popular versions of story retold by Charles Kovac or Jakob Streit may be strongly influenced by their interpretations of anthroposophy. It is understandable why teachers continue to use them, but we should be critical and especially those who publish Waldorf books should be careful what they make available.
Folktales
As the name suggest these are stories that come from a particular culture or region and because of this they may offer gender and racial stereotypes (witches, gypsies etc.). They often relate to semi-historical places and personalities, and they have a core factual basis. They may have an obvious moral content, a lesson to be learned.
Fables
These short stories, often involving animals in anthropomorphic roles, illustrate a moral point.
Stories of wise and holy people
These stories often loosely based on historical personalities portray idealized human beings showing their special and spiritual powers (e.g. saints ). They have a clear pedagogical and moral purpose and illustrate goodness and wisdom.
Tricksters
Tricksters are common figures in many story traditions. They have ambivalent, psychologically complex, always clever and mischievous and often humorous characters, that can be both good and helpful or wicked and deceitful, challenge existing authorities and undermine order. They may also teach the other characters and thus the listener certain truths. Examples include Loki, Oral tales (stories passed down by word of mouth) come in several genres, and each is characterized by its purpose, style, and relationship to truth or belief. Examples include Norse Loki, Hawaiina Māui, Native American Coyote/Raven etc.
Myths
Myths are stories with specific cultural backgrounds that often offer a wide panorama of events relating to the creation of the world, the origins of particular peoples and creatures. As such they offer an imaginative version of how a particular culture experiences the world, its natural and supernatural features, plants and animals. In particular they show the relationship of the people to the world, to nature, to the gods and to other peoples. In so doing they often provide an account of the origins and meaning of traditions, rituals, beliefs, epistemologies and religious beliefs. Thus , myths give us insight into the world view of particular cultures. Myths often focus on the gods and their interactions with each other and with human beings. We have to be careful about the sources we use. Many accounts of older and non-European cultures have been documented and interpreted by Europeans and may reflect inappropriate and basically false versions.
Epics, sagas and legends
Often based on medieval accounts of heroic deeds, these stories reflect historical personalities and characters though filtered through the cultural function of valorising heroes as part of establishing and maintaining cultural identity. Legends are embellished accounts of individuals, though the places are real and the events often have a historical basis, more recent than myths.  Epics are usually long narrative poems (often in translation) that tell the heroic and tragic stories of particular heroes. Sometimes, the emphasis is on the hero’s physical, moral and biographical journey (examples include, Gilgamesh, Odysseus, medieval Gawain (and the Green Knight)). The distinction top myth is not clear cut, but epics and legends tend to focus on individuals and are more psychological in the delineation of character.
Historical narrative
Episodes from history are often best told, with the narrative supported by other sources such as texts, images, artefacts and museum visits. Historical narrative deserves a whole chapter in itself (see Rawson, 2026). Here I want to mention just a couple of obvious points. Historical narrative differs from other forms of storytelling because it seeks to base itself on what is factually true, whilst other forms of narrative only have to be plausible. Here are a few guidelines for telling history as a story.
Establish the historical context bearing the background knowledge of the students in mind.
Consider cultural, social, political and economic factors.
Use vivid description.
Develop the characters and plot.
Convey historical ideas and themes.
Analyse in age-appropriate ways, how we know about these events in history.
Consider the relevance of the events for us today.
Biographies
Biographies can be the basis for narratives told orally. Biographies of historical or living persons can be relevant from grade 7 upwards. The same criteria apply for biographies as historical narrative listed above.
Criteria for choice of stories
There is a convention going back to Steiner who gave several outlines for narrative material, though much briefer than is usually thought. He didn’t offer a single unified curriculum and the indications are scattered among lectures and discussions with teachers. Anyone who wants the exact references can ask an AI platform, as I did using ChatGpT. Essentially Steiner suggested the following aspects.
The choice of stories should be developmental, though exactly in which sense is not always clear.
Storytelling should involve repetition and rhythm, especially for young children, and should cultivate reverence by avoiding cynicism, irony or scepticism.
Before the age of 9 stories should be imaginative and include fairy tales and have a strong pictorial element, without explanation.
Stories should told not read.
Stories should reflect human culture evolution and individual development.
Between classes 9 and 10 years old he recommended Old Testament stories (because of the experience of separation) later Norse myths,
later classes Greek myths (because they portray spiritual realities),
thereafter historical storytelling,
biography in adolescence.
I would add to Steiner’s criteria, which remain valid, that it is important to be aware why you are telling a story. How we tell and recall a story is as important as which story we tell. Clearly, we can tell myths in class 4, 5 and 6 to illustrate the world view of a particular culture, but we can also work with myth in class 10 or 11 in order to analyse the journey of the hero or to understand the transition from myth to literature. A class 12 can choreograph and rehearse a fairy tale to present to young children, discussing the possible meaning and archetypes portrayed and how to show these on stage.
We should consider why we tell which stories in a particular class. The traditional convention of story material can briefly be told and is well known. Fairy stories (still) belong in class 1, fables (human weakness) and stories of saints (human moral purpose) stories in grade 2 , Old Testament stories (Hebrew Mythology) in grade three to illustrate the Fall and human ejection from paradise to a life of work and suffering in childbirth. These stories also show how the Jewish people organized their religious and social life using laws. In grade 4 Norse myths offer a creation myth distinct from that in the Old Testament, and a polytheistic world of human foibles, intrigue, jealousy and rivalry and interactions between gods and between people and the gods. Grade 5 offers us multiple mythologies from Ancient India, Persia, Egypt, and Greece, purportedly portraying a changing consciousness, and so on to history with Alexander the Great and Roman history (which starts out mythologically and then move to history).
This narrative of narrative definitely works, in the sense that children enjoy the stories and teachers can easily find the resources to tell them. Nevertheless, it is still incumbent on us to consider why we tell these stories and not others and what the educational purpose is. One function is easy to explain and entirely legitimate. Children generally love to listen to a well-told story, and they usually sit quietly. The stories provide content for retelling, illustrating and eventually retelling in writing. These are reason enough to tell stories but does really tell us why stories and which stories. As pointed out above, the list of qualities of narrative above offer further meaningful reasons for exposing children to narrative- it models how we deal with complexity, make meaning and relate to the world, it helps build shared sense of community and ultimately identity, it is a prompt and scaffolds writing and later reading since rich experience or oral narrative primes children for reading narrative in books. In the widest sense rich experience of narrative is formative of the human being by exposing us to a wide range of ways of seeing and thinking about the world, about life, about ourselves and shows us how complex people are (and always have been), because narrative records human nature in all its glory and darkness in digestible form. We can take horrors and tragedy and betrayal through story in ways that enable us to make sense of it, or at least to give it a conceptual form.
Given that one of the clear aims of Waldorf education today to foster intercultural competence then stories from a wide range of cultures seems an obvious way of doing this. Perhaps 50 % of stories should come from the local or regional context and the rest selected from the extensive body of world tales.
Being familiar with multiple forms of narrative schools us in the ability to express our own trauma and tragedy, disappointments but also our expectations, hopes and aspirations. That is why it is so important from grade 1 onwards that children are not only recipients of stories but are actively encouraged to tell and retell their own stories. The stories we tell offer them models, but the way we listen to their stories teaches them the importance of listening, empathy and respect for the experience of the other.
I suggest that unlike other curriculum content, which is didactic, driving the development of new ways of seeing, thinking, reflecting, and expressing ourselves, the narrative curriculum has several other vital functions. These include:
Stories tap into a deep level of pan-cultural consciousness located in the realm of orality that is sedimented in our languages, cultural places, music, dance, crafts and so on. Part of this realm can be manipulated by political forces to generate xenophobia, hatred and fear of others. Therefore, engaging with it in an open way is a necessary cultural activity.
Stories show children and young people how others experience the world. Others includes people in the past and people from unfamiliar cultures.
Stories show how people engage with existential challenges and can be transformed by the process.
Stories lift us out our everyday concerns and connect us to a more meaningful source of identity and shared humanity.
As such, narrative is part of our development as persons, and should therefore be free from the demands of qualification. That means we should not judge or test children and young people’s knowledge or experiences of narrative. We can appreciate their understanding and how they express it or how they are moved and motivated by story, but we should not make this into testable, reproduceable knowledge and skills. Narrative belongs to the domain of being human and becoming a person, not to the realm of measurable knowledge and demonstrable knowledge and thus a form of qualification. Stories should not be instrumentalized as prescribed, obligatory curriculum, measurable learning outcomes or required reading. Like healthy nourishment and safe environments children have a basic right to access to stories, both told and in text or image forms.
Figure 11 Overview of the genres of stories and the sequence of their relevance in the curriculum
Another developmental aspect of storytelling is the kind of images that are used. When telling young children stories, it may be helpful to use literal and physical images to enhance their embodiment of the story. A description of hot salty tears springing from the girl’s eyes falling to make dark patches on her linen skirt is very literal and may help the child visualize and feel the emotion experience by the protagonist. Later, around the age of 11 or 12, the description of the protagonist’s burning sense of honour and injustice that she had been insulted by the arrogant rival who has used her position to seek advantage, may summon forth the listener’s empathy and identification. The symbolic significance of Vladimir Lenin absent-mindedly plucking the heads off the red carnations that had been thrust into his hand before climbing up onto the drivers cabin of the steaming locomotive that the sailors had heaved off the tracks with revolutionary fervour in St Petersburg -Finlyandsky Station at the outbreak of the November Revolution, probably wouldn’t be recognized by students before high school. There is a developmental transition from naïve sense-based, concrete understanding and abstract symbolism.  As in the sequence of story types above, the earlier levels of understanding remain effective- a teenager will be equally affected by physical detail in a story- if it makes an impact like physical violence or physical or slapstick (physical, situational) comedy- but the older student get, the more capable of grasping the moral implications and symbolic significance.
When recalling stories teacher should avoid contrived analytical questions. The following dialogue illustrates this:
Teacher: What is the story about?
Children. (silence)
Teacher: Who is the main character? Um….what kind of story is it?
Child: Ain’t nobody can talk about things being about themselves. (Maybin, 1992)
Finally, I wish to reiterate how important it is that children and young people are enabled and encouraged to tell their own stories.
WPA: Stories engage the student’s imagination via their feelings and drawing on their embodied sensory experiences and knowledge. Narrative uses sense of language, thought and sense of the other as a self. Stories also draw on embodied traditional knowledge of spiritual and cultural realities, often structured in archetypal ways.
Good Waldorf practice: Teachers tell stories from, all round the world and encourage students from the earliest grades on, to tell their own stories.
Frontal teaching or teacher-centred instruction
‘Talk and chalk’, or frontal teaching, is a very common Waldorf method; one that has some benefits for learning but many disadvantages. Among the benefits are the direct communication of the teacher, for example in telling stories or explaining things. The front of the classroom is also a stage for not only the teacher but individual students and groups to make presentations - the very act of coming to the front involves stepping up into a prominent position where one can be seen and heard by all those present. Even in classrooms where the desks are arranged in a circle or U shape can periodically turn towards the front, wherever that may be located. This is usually where the blackboard is but can be anywhere in the room where someone becomes the focus of attention. Classrooms with flexible arrangements, (sometime referred to as the ‘moving classroom’, but better referred to as an adaptable classroom), which doesn’t have desks and chairs but benches and cushions on which the students kneel (usually only used for Class 1 and 2) can have a variety of frontal arrangements, depending on the focus of the activity. The ‘front’ can be in the centre of the room with the ‘audience’ around it in a circle and the teacher, or whoever is presenting, has to turn around as she speaks.
The frontal classroom as a teaching and learning method, however, does not encourage self-activity or self-responsibility for learning or learning behaviour, for example it may encourage children to rely on the teacher for imposing order and attention. Frontal, teacher-centred teaching tends to ignore learning differences. The chalk part is fine when it involves evocative and helpful chalk drawings but not useful when children are supposed to copy text from the blackboard, which involves little to no learning at all. Teacher-focused learning operates best when stories are told, or when instructions and explanations are given.
WPA: Frontal teaching provides opportunities for shared learning in which everyone gets the same information at the same time in the same way, which is economical and democratic. Individuals may need help to enable them to benefit from this- we call this equity. Other than these aspects there are few specific reasons based on Steiner’s pedagogical anthropology to have high levels of frontal teaching.
Good Waldorf practice: storytelling, explanations using the blackboard and demonstrations often use a frontal position for the teacher.
The function and importance of recall in learning
When we remember we retrieve embodied experiences and raise them to consciousness. These experiences have been sorted and stored by our Self working in the unconscious field of the lived-in-body, particularly where the experience has been shared with others who were present (i.e. members of the class) and given direction by the teacher’s intentions. One of the benefits of sharing recollections is seeing what each person noticed and then agreeing on what should be ‘reported’, that is, what we think is important to ‘take away’ from the experience.  Deliberate recalling is an act of applied will and focus, which is why it is good if each student actually makes the effort to do, rather than relying on other’s memories. It is of little value if one or two students tell the teacher what she wants to hear, so that we can proceed with the lesson (“where were we?”). The act of recalling, retrieving, remembering, reconstructing, rehearsing - all words that offer insight into the activity involved - is in effect creating a new perception, not in the world but in our interior space, the mind.
Each retrieval is not merely a matter of opening a metaphorical neurological file and taking out what we have stored away (like retrieving a document), because what we remember has changed since we last had it in our consciousness. Firstly, it obviously lacks the immediacy of direct experience and is generally a pale and initially partial version, but it is also now enhanced and personalised. Obviously, people recall what affected them most, what they think is most important. One group of researchers write that “active retrieval of the key ideas from memory also helps to differentiate those memories from other, related material.” (Oakley, et al. 2021) .
In the learning process recalling, retrieving, reconstructing experiences is the basis for consolidating memory and making sense of those experiences and is therefore a crucial part of learning.
John Hattie, who probably knows as much about learning as anyone today has identified various aspects of forgetting and recall that are vital for successful learning. As far as I can see nothing he describes contradicts or replaces WPA. Hattie reminds us of cognitive load theory, which explains that remembering consists of acquiring memories (encoding), storing them and being able to retrieve them again. When we are engaging in some activity our working memory retains what we are currently paying attention to and the memories we call on to make sense of the sense impressions we have. Working memory can easily be overloaded, a fact which implications for learning. cognitive load theory (CLT) explains this by highlighting that processing our experiences involves sensory memory, which involves what we are currenting perceiving, working memory, which has limited capacity and therefore sorts out what is relevant at that moment, and long-term memory, which retains what we decide is important. The implications of this is that new information or input should be clearly structured in digestible ‘chunks’ and avoid multi-tasking (listening/watching and note taking at the same time).
Other research that Hattie and Clarke (2019) cite includes the insight that challenging both thinking and memory by letting students work out what the task involves enhances our ability to process and recall it. From, a WPA perspective, we would say that greater the activity of the Self, the more likely we are to recall and understand complex ideas. The same research highlights that forgetting is important to long-term memory, especially when an effort is made to recall, reconstruct re-evaluate things that have been forgotten. This links with evidence that practice spread over time in short sessions is more powerful that a lot of practice at one time. “Having multiple opportunities over time to learn, and being given feedback about our understanding over time, is more likely to cause connections between ideas and stronger associations with what we already know, thus we are more likely to retain the learning in the long run” (Ibid. p. 87). This is called distributed practice and interleaved practice. Interleaving means alternating or mixing the focus on topics, which and enhances retention and understanding. Recapitulation of what has been learned and regular practice reinforces skills that have been learned. An WPA perspective on this would be the reasons Steiner gave for block teaching and repetition with variations, which strength the will and bring the will into thinking, which is another way of saying we bring motivation into our thinking and the effort involved is experienced as meaningful. Motivation is helped when the students themselves are more involved in actively planning and structuring the learning situation (e.g., by asking them how a skills could realistically be practiced).
Hattie also emphasizes that the context in which things are learned helps with retention, and in particular real, authentic contexts make the experiences and skills learned easier to recall and apply. However, it is not the context that needs to be retain ed long term, but rather the essence of what was learned. This reminds me of Steiner account of how the Self takes up the structures or outcome of what has been retained in memory and converts this into ability. The example he gave was of learning reading and writing. Once the skill has been learned we don’t need to recall all the steps leading up to it (e.g. the stories and pictures that led us to learn some of the letters of the alphabet. The scaffolding can, as it were, be taken down, once the building stands. The important thing is the the real situation enhances the meaningfulness of the experience for the student. Later once the skill has been learned, or the essence of an series of experiences has been understood, it is this that is retained in ling term memory.
An important aspect of memory and what has been learned, is that the teacher needs to be aware what students already know. Nothing is more demotivating for students who come to school with enthusiasm because they want to learn, than the teacher insisting they start from scratch again, or assuming they don’t know anything. Class 1 teachers often overlook the many practical skills that children bring with them from kindergarten and start treating them as if they know nothing. This soon makes them passive or easily distracted. Children’s prior achievements are important to acknowledge. The best way to do this is at the start of a new block, to ask the students in groups to make mindmaps of what they already know and can do with a given field.
Recalling something when required to do so (i.e. at will) requires an act of will on the part of the child (or any person) and this requires an effort. Thus, it does not help children if the teacher asks generally, “who can recall the main points of the story from yesterday?” and two or three children answer. These are often the same small group who enjoy doing this and can do it well. The rest of the class know this and come to rely on them and basically remain passive. The point is not just to link on to what occurred in the previous lesson but to actively retrieve, reconstruct and sort memories and make sense of them, so that when we move on in our consciousness to the next activity, what ‘sinks back’ into the unconscious is not the same original memory, but a new, enriched experience- enriched with new meaning and relevance. And if we have been active in this process, we have made a stronger personal connection to the experience, which means it has greater meaning for us personally.
Therefore, teachers have to be creative in how they structure the recall part of the lesson, so that each individual has the opportunity to become active and form a relationship to the subject matter. I give some suggestions below.
One of the early mentors of the York Steiner School, where I started my Waldorf career was Els Goettgens from the Netherlands. Els used to ‘preach’ the virtues of each child doing recall and secondly, using non-verbal means, with the aims of digging deeper into what was embodied. Els was particularly keen on drama and enactment, and this was confirmed by Gabriel Knight, an experienced class teacher from Northern Ireland. One method was ‘freeze framing’, whereby a group would prepare and present a frozen frame from the story and other children would try to guess which episode in this story this was. Gabriel taught the children archetypal gestures and encouraged them to recreate a brief episode from the story and ask the others to identify it. In class 3 when the children can write text freely, she would ask them to write down three key words and then find a single word to summarise the essence. Or she would give them four key words (as nouns or as adjectives) and ask them to reconstruct the story.
As soon as we put things into words, we subtly change their meaning, because language is often normative and conventional - especially when children do not yet have a rich and varied vocabulary. This may appear somewhat time consuming, but not if one observes the value, it brings in terms of depth of connection and learning. As Els put it, the child has just been back in the spiritual world (overnight) and is returning with treasures extracted from the day’s harvest. Each will bring back what she found, like children returning from the beach. The beauty therefore is to put all the treasures together and see what we have.
This reminds us that learning is also a social activity. Unlike many views of learning that see it as something that happens in people’s heads, we see learning as something that happens when people interact with other people. We learn best, and this applies to adults as much as children, in learning communities and we all belong to a variety of learning communities, at home, at work and of course in the classroom. Recall is a moment when the learning community is particularly active.
There are simple techniques we can use:
Each child draws a quick sketch, or uses beeswax to model something, or cutting out shapes of coloured paper, or enacts or role playing (alone or with a partner) what she recalls and shares this with her neighbour.
Children tell each other in pairs what they remember, then compare this with another pair in a snowballing exercise. Speakers can summarise the recall of the others. In doing so the class watches out for contradictions or identifying significantly different memories.
Pairs of children write short dialogues summarising what they recall. And so on.
Each student writes down what she finds most unclear.
Getting students to teach each other in pairs what they think the most important things are, then move on and teach another student.
Asking, “what do you remember?“  is a bit simplistic and uninspiring. The questions teachers ask can elicit more than naturally emerges.
One can use the planetary qualities described by Steiner in connection with Eurythmy to prompt recall in the upper school. Each of the planetary types has a distinctive characteristic, which can be read as a way of seeing. These have been formulated in quite a general way, so that they can be adapted to different age groups:
A ‘Moon‘ type recall involves simply mirroring back, perhaps in a written description of part of the story or what was seen, in a relatively neutral, factual way.
A ‘Mercury type’ approach means making comparisons or identifying similarities within the overall experience. This perspective also looks more at process than outcomes.
A ‘Venus type’ perspective calls for an emotional response, how it felt to experience what is being recalled, or what the figures in the story might have felt.
A ‘Mars type’ perspective requires a judgement to be made as to what was essential, thus sorting the main points from the detail.
A ‘Jupiter type’ quality involves the students in recalling the gestures - often the dramatic gesture of what they are recalling.
A ‘Saturn type’ recall perspective involves looking at original causes and the significance of the whole.
What is generally helpful is distinguishing between declarative memory and procedural memory. Declarative memory involves facts, dates, names, formulae and things that can be itemised, whilst procedural memory involves recalling how to do something. Declarative memory includes episodic memory of events (often in the form of what happened to us yesterday). Procedural learning involves intuiting the rules and allocating things to categories, which we do in the next phase of learning. We use declarative memory to reconstruct complex events by locating significant markers in the narrative. Learners may use visual prompts in recalling a verb form (in a second language) or seeing the sum 7 X 9 within the 9 times table. Procedural memory helps, for example, second language speakers to use the correct form of a verb intuitively (even when they may not be able to explain the rule), or children to know without conscious thinking that 7 x 9 = 63.
The declarative system is taught, i.e. systematically instructed, whereas the procedural system is caught, i.e. picked up through observation and participation (or ‘LOPI’ - Looking On and Pitching In, as the anthropologist Barbara Rogoff calls it), or immersion in language or frequent practice with prompt feedback. The declarative system is quick to apply but slow to learn, since many learners find it abstract or difficult to follow, though from the teacher’s perspective it is more flexible because it is more easily steered. The point about declarative memory is that the items need to be embedded in context that gives meaning to them. Procedural learning takes time for observation and immersion but leads to quicker learning, although because it is a more natural practice-based approach, it is difficult to interrupt and repeat without interrupting the flow and it also relies on habits (including sometimes bad habits). As Barbara Oakley and colleagues put it, “good teachers teach so that students learn with both their declarative and procedural systems…(they) make sure, wherever possible, students learn using each of the two systems” (Oakley, et al. 2021, 136).
Teachers who give a test at the end of a main lesson block and imagine that this demonstrates what the students have learned are making a wrong assumption. Learning for the test only uses short-term knowledge and this is soon forgotten (and is non-retrievable).  If you really want to know what students have learned, ask them at the start of a new block, what they recall from the previous one, once one has warmed up the theme. The same applies to vocabulary tests, beloved of second language teachers. Only vocabulary that is retained in working memory is worth having because it can be retrieved and the best way to ensure this is regular use.
Testing may have its uses (though these are very limited) but testing what has just been ‘memorized’ is not one of the benefits. It is far better to,
a)    decide what knowledge needs to be retained and rehearse this regularly in context,
b)    teach to develop knowledgeable skills with purpose,
c)     give meaningful tasks that call on knowledge and skills and let students access the resources they need (dictionaries, reference material etc.) and would have in real life.
WPA perspective
Steiner explored the phenomenon of memory from a spiritual perspective and located memory in the etheric body or life processes. His basic account (in Theosophy in the chapter Re-embodiment of the spirit and destiny) he speaks of the
transmutation which the spirit effects on the treasures of memory. It consigns whatever can merely lead to pictures of the separate experiences to their fate, and extracts from them only the force necessary for enhancing its own abilities. Thus, not one experience passes unutilized; the soul preserves each one as memory, and from each the spirit draws forth all that can enrich its abilities and the whole content of its life. The human spirit grows through assimilated experiences. And although one cannot find the past experiences in the spirit as it were in a storeroom, one nevertheless finds their effects in the abilities which the human being has acquired (Steiner, 1970, p. 51).
In the First Teachers Course, Steiner refers to how teacher can ‘educate’ the memory.
memory is activated when the will, in which we are asleep, take shold of unconscious mental pictures and raises them to consciousness. Just as ‘I’ and soul body when they are separated from the physical body and life body in our sleep, gather strength in the spiritual world in order to bring fresh impulses to the latter when they reunite, the sleeping will acquires the strength required for the memory process. Because the will is asleep, however, you cannot teach children directly how to use it…What you can do is educate the child in such a way that they develop life habits in soul, body and spirit, that support such will activity in any given situation. Let us look at this in more detail.
Imagine you manage to kindle in the children a lively interest in the animal world through the way you teach. This will not happen in a day, of course. You will have to plan your lessons so that this interest awakens gradually. The livelier the interest you awaken in the children in
Good Waldorf practice: Recall is an important part of learning because it calls for self-activity and helps form connections to experiences. Recall operates in various rhythms, short term (next lesson), medium term (end of the block) and long term (end of the year or start of the next block).
Teacher preparation and recall
The way a teacher prepares and presents new material in a lesson obviously influences the quality of the students’ recall. If the teacher is clear in the preparation what the main purpose of the lesson is to be, and how the whole structure of the lesson enhances the student’s ability to notice what is important and be able to distinguish this from what is secondary or merely illustrative (‘packaging’ as it were). This is best done implicitly, or artistically, rather than explicitly (e.g. by the teacher saying “and now this bit is really important”), so that an element of discovery occurs from the perspective of the student. If the teacher identifies what is salient in the preparation by metaphorically distilling the essence of what is to be learned from the mass of information that often attaches to a topic and does this the day or night before the teaching, then this has the effect of rehearsal, so that when the teacher presents the new material in class, her focus is on the essentials.
Perhaps we can understand Steiner’s suggestion that bringing the class to mind before our preparation has the effect of helping the teacher focus on the learning needs of this particular learning group, in this sense. Since the teacher is a person of significance for the students (or should try to be), then the teacher ‘reaching out’ to them in advance, in her consciousness may be ‘picked up’ by the unconsciousness of the students, since consciousness in Steiner’s terms is a series of states ranging from fully awake consciousness through to full unconscious consciousness and that this latter is not bound by time and space. Thus, the teacher’s intentional relationship to both the students and the subject matter already forms a strong relationship before the events in the classroom. Just as the experiences of the lesson work on in the unconscious after the lesson, so the phase before the lesson needs to be included. The students intuitively pick up on the intentions of the teacher and recognize (perhaps even re-recognize) the intensity of the teacher’s interest in the subject matter and which aspects he wishes to emphasize.
Summary of the various types of recall
WPA: Steiner frequently referred to teaching economy and the importance of teacher preparation and forming a conscious relationship to the students when planning lessons. His most general and important reference to preparation is his frequent references to the teachers needing to be able to read the needs of the children using their anthroposophical understandings.
Good Waldorf practice: know what is really relevant for pupils to recall and know how to do or use and rehearse what is really needed regularly in meaningful activities.
Direct instruction
This is a variant of the frontal led situation and usually involves the teacher explaining something that the students are unlikely to work out themselves. It may also include the teacher setting a particular activity or task. Elsewhere, I have explained the difference between constrained and unconstrained skills, noting that constrained skills - the basic building blocks of a particular subject - usually need to be taught directly. However, even here this does not simply mean that teachers tell students what they have to learn, but rather guide them through a process of discovery and steps in the learning rhythm, so that they come to an understanding of the phenomenon. There are a number of topics that are best taught by direct instruction, including efficient processes in mathematics and physics or the use of formulae in chemistry, but even here the phenomenological approach means that the students identify what the principles behind the practices are, at least in general terms.
Twenty minutes is usually the maximum time that children, young people and even adults can concentrate on new direct instruction, and even this should be interspersed with group discussions, note taking or short phases of movement. Some authors say that direct instruction leads to 5% retention, though practising systematic recall will increase that significantly. Pictures help and as does a short, written summary using key words.
Actually, all instruction is really better understood as a way of directing the students’ attention to what is important. This can be done directly by pointing or showing, or indirectly by motivating them to observe something more closely.
A variant of this method is small group instruction, which can sometimes be helpful with students with learning difficulties, those who are not secure in the language or have been absent due to illness. In effect the teacher explains to the small group what has already been talked about in the whole class, or alternatively gives the information before it is covered in class - known as ‘pre-teaching’. Sometimes this is speeded up so the students can catch up, often it is necessary to take smaller steps with this group. This can even be individual instruction as needed. The small size of the group means the teacher can tailor the explanation more closely to individual needs.
WPA perspective: It is important that the teachers cultivate a reciprocal interest in both the students and the subject matter.
Good Waldorf practice: explaining or demonstrating a complex process, demonstrating often using visual aids (blackboard, showing examples, visual displays).
Student centred, indirect instruction
Given that one of the main aims of Waldorf education is to prompt the self-activity of the students, getting them to do much of the work is an important method. There are many forms of it, but the essential element is the students doing the work under the guidance of the teacher, who offers material, methods and supportive backup. This includes all kinds of useful methods, such as brainstorming, mind mapping, collecting and sorting relevant information, interviewing other people, analysing data and information and interpreting this in groups. At some point student learning has to be presented and assessed. It is always helpful if criteria are given beforehand, and even, where possible, involving students identifying criteria. This method is often referred to as a constructivist approach because it assumes that the learners can construct their own understandings based on the material and the tasks they have been given but can also involve the students in planning the learning. Group work often takes this form.
The disadvantage of this approach is sometimes motivation if there is no one keeping the process moving when things get difficult. It also requires considerable preparation on the part of the teacher so that the learning process goes in the desired direction and arrives at the planned outcomes. The method is most useful when the outcomes are much more open, and the students can make genuine discoveries which they can then share with others. A fairly tight model for working is usually needed, for example in an animal studies block, the teacher has modelled how each animal is studied, for example the students have to describe the animal’s body shape, way of moving, what it eats, its habitat, how it cares for its young and the challenges it faces in its natural environment. These can be formulated as a series of questions and then students can be directed to specific resource material either on paper or online.  The same can be done in botany and regional geography and history. Book projects are similar, in that the students do the reading, the thinking and the presenting. The younger the children, the more preparation will be necessary by the teacher, but once they learn to do this kind of research in the middle school, they become independent learners by the time they get to grade 8 and upwards. So, the teacher teaches the methods, and the students apply them, as Hugo Gaudig, Steiner’s contemporary educationalist, said.
WPA perspectives: All transformative learning requires the self-activity of the learner, along the principle that you can take a horse to water, but you can’t make it drink (though, of course you can make the horse thirsty and the ‘water’ sweet). Therefore, any method that encourages the Self to become active, is good from a WPA perspective.
Good Waldorf practice: Giving students the tools and methods to work on their own, allowing them to present what they have researched and worked on, and then giving them constructive practical feedback, is an important method in Waldorf education.
Scaffolding
Scaffolding is a metaphor that refers to the various actions teachers can take to provide learners with the support they need to achieve something that they cannot accomplish independently. The aim, however, is not that the students produce something that they could not achieve on their own, but that the support enables them to move from their current level of skills in a particular field, to the next level. The concept of scaffolding is rooted in the Vygotskian idea of the ‘Zone of Proximal Development’ (ZPD). This demarcates the learning space between what the learner can currently do and the steps that need to be taken to the next level of learning or development.
Figure 12 The zone of proximal development; the first three stages require scaffolding.
In scaffolding, it helps that the teacher knows what the students’ current learning status is and what the next significant step needs to be. This needs to be emphasised because if the starting point at which the scaffolding is applied is already too high for the learner, little learning will occur, and the learner may become demotivated or frustrated and give up. We often talk of picking up the class where they are, but often leads teachers to make assumptions about where they think the class ought to be and ignores the fact that in any heterogeneous class, some students will be further ahead than others. Therefore, it is important that the first step is not too high for all students, even though it might be too low for some.
Gradually the scaffolding is reduced and finally taken away completely, at which point the learner can be considered to have learned something and is now in a position to do it without any specific help. Scaffolding is help towards a state of requiring no help. There is considerable evidence that high levels of scaffolding lead to high levels of learning, especially if the scaffolding is tailored to actual individual learning needs. This does not mean that every child in the class has a different set of tasks, because all students benefit from intensive scaffolding. Those who can learn faster leave the scaffolding behind them and can then apply what they've learned, ideally in authentic tasks that interest them, rather than just occupying them while everyone catches up.
Scaffolding can be used in many ways at different ages. If students are asked to write a short text about something they have experienced in a previous lesson, it helps to have a verbal recall with the class and then to write down key words on the blackboard. That helps students remember, suggests the key ideas and show how important words are spelled. In maths, sample examples of how problems are solved can be provided on paper, to remind the students what the steps are. In second languages, the teacher speaks possible sentences, perhaps in answer to a question, the class, or smaller groups repeat these together and then individuals can be asked. This involves repetition in context, models how the words are pronounced and makes the step of speaking alone easier. Giving students a half-solved problem and asking them to finish it can be a good scaffold. An unhelpful scaffold is when the teacher finishes tasks for the students (e.g. knitting to the end of the rows). If the student really can’t complete this task, perhaps the task needs to be simplified or another task chosen that the student can finish. Scaffolding is designed to support self-activity, not simply get the job done.
Figure 13 Scaffolding in handwork, in which the teacher assists by starting a row in knitting. (Drawing by Justin Knight)
Scaffolding is an important part of inclusion. By providing students with the support and resources they need to participate in the school activities, we provide equity (as opposed to equality). We provide the conditions for participation, though the person still has to take hold of the opportunities, which is more empowering.
WPA perspectives: This perspective incorporates what Steiner said about imitation, emulation and teacher authority.
Good Waldorf practice: the teacher offers the students just enough support for them to take the next step on their own.
Learning from exemplars
In teaching and learning, exemplars can be used in different ways:
material can be presented as an exemplar – it exemplifies a range of aspects of what the teacher wishes the children or young people to learn,
an exemplar can provide a ‘way in’ to a broader topic or context, or
one activity or learning experience can be used to develop a range of skills that can be applied in other contexts.
There are both negative and positive versions of exemplary learning. Martyn recalls a negative example in metalwork at school. According to his albeit probably prejudiced memory, he spent a whole term hammering out a piece of metal that may have been intended to be part of a sliding gate bolt, but which was never used, or indeed was even intended to be used. That is a bad example of making an exemplary object in order to demonstrate a skill. In woodwork, he recalls making various corner joints but never a box or frame that would have been useful. It is not just true of crafts, that the things that students make should be useful and actually used (from crocheted potholders, knitted socks, to copper bowls and iron pokers), it is also true of academic subjects. Who do we actually write essays for? For the teacher, to get grades? This is more difficult because we have fewer uses for essays analysing the causes of the decline and fall of the Roman empire or Wilfred Owen’s poems, interesting though these topics are.
One method is to introduce and practise the skills and then invite the student to choose an application and offer support. An essay may be relevant for a presentation or portfolio about Rome, or as a springboard for creative writing. One colleague of Martyn’s spent three weeks of a poetics block in class 10 on one single fable. The class reflected on the nature of fables and produced fables of their own. They also took the base story of the fable and used it as material for a wide range of literary genres, from ballads and folk songs to crime stories, and scientific papers, newspaper articles and existentialist one-act plays. In foreign language teaching in Martyn’s school the students learn to identify the characteristics of a good short story and then spend the whole block writing (and endlessly re-writing) short stories. At the end of the block each student chooses one and a collection is published, and the books sold, with the proceeds going to a good cause.
Choosing single exemplary examples in a field allows them to be exposed to deeper study than can usually be done when more examples are chosen. For example, in a land art project, students worked with wool they collected from barbed wire fences and researched the nature, origins and history of wool in the region. Martyn reports that in his earlier days as an art history teacher he used to show dozens of pictures (with slides in those days, with dubious colour quality) over the course of a block: numerous examples of works by important artists (of whom there are many) and then a whole period of art (e.g. the Italian Renaissance, Impressionism). Latterly he has reduced the number of pictures to one a week. That means spending 5 days, 90 minutes a day working on one painting, analysing its language, composition, colour palette, the narrative of the figure, the sources of the theme, the context, even enacting it (to add a performative element- we have enacted Botticelli’s Primavera, Rembrandt’s Night Watch), and painted portraits in the style of David Hockney. After a week the students complain when a new picture is introduced because they felt they were only really getting started. Thus, the exemplary aspect is engaged with.
These examples are from the upper school but the method is actually implicit in the lower school from developing the letters of the alphabet, to carrying out a building project, baking bread, studying beech trees in a wood, making charcoal, all practical activities that have a context and methodology.
WPA perspectives: in the schooling of students’ abilities of judgement, it is necessary for them to appreciate the subtle relationship between particular cases and general truths or principles.
Good Waldorf practice: fewer is more- that is, a few well-chosen examples on which students can learn how to work with a particular item or topic often has a greater learning effect because the students can appreciate the richness of exemplars, and this disposes them to look at similar or related phenomena in a more profound way. Also showing how things are embedded in a meaningful ecological, cultural and historical context helps students develop integrated, joined up and holistic thinking and seeing.
Project Work and Independent study
Traditionally in Waldorf schools, young people in class 8 and class 12 complete extended, independent projects; the benefits of these are hopefully obvious and don’t need to be drawn out. But in fact, projects can be smaller and more frequent. Independent study means that a pupil is directed towards material, given a task and time frame and usually an expectation of presentation. Once the class has learned how we study animals (their body shape and movement, their lifestyle, their habits, diet, particular characteristics, how they raise their young, the kind of environment they live in, what other animals, plants and people they relate to), the children can apply this model to researching the animals that interest them and present them. Of course, they need guidance and material: they should not just be left to surf the internet or stop at Wikipedia (often a great resource) because they will be unable to understand much of the information they find.
Some Waldorf teachers are reluctant to ‘give away’ what they see as their job, believing that no one could present the lynx or polar bear as they can in full Goethean, phenomenological manner. That is the point of the exemplary method referred to above; the teacher must exemplify how animals, plants, landscapes are characterised and explored and so the students learn to look at the world with a method that helps them to form relationships to it. Other teachers, in a naive attempt to involve student participation provide too little guidance and this is often left to parents (“dad I’ve got to make a presentation on bees”) to support, most of whom are either at a loss or don’t have time and see this as the teacher’s task.
The question is how much time in the lessons teachers should give for projects. Independent projects obviously need to be done outside the classroom and often outside the school. But projects can also be done fruitfully in lessons when the teacher is available to offer support and feedback. Projects are not just additional to what the teacher teaches - if they are, there is a risk of overloading students whilst at the same time giving them the impression that what the teacher does is more important, and projects are more of an occupational therapy. The real value of project work is if it is highly valued, rigorously evaluated and given prime learning time. It complements what the teacher does and, in many cases, replaces some of what the teacher would otherwise do.
Grasping this requires a paradigm shift in the thinking of many teachers, parents and students: learning is not only the outcome of what teachers do and it is not (only) about accumulating prescribed knowledge which can be tested. If projects are worth doing, they are worth doing well and should have the same if not higher academic status. The presentation of a project and its documentation are ideally awarded academic credits (at whatever stage the school introduces these). Portfolios can be produced showing the learning process, its context and a reflection on the process.
Presenting independent work is also an important point at which the learning becomes collective. A good presentation provides the other with real insight. It can be a talk with handout, a slide show, a poster, a text: the important thing is the student has guidance in the form of criteria (how long, what to avoid, how to make contact with an audience, how to design a poster that has a clear message etc).
The quality of project reflects the teacher’s ability to teach the students basic skills, enable them to have the courage to explore and take risks (and take helpful feedback), and the extent to which they are encouraged to be creative with what they have been shown (from grade 1 onwards). This is the greatest strength of Waldorf education and sometimes it greatest weakness, when class teachers don’t allow, enable and facilitate self-activity in writing, reading, arts, crafts and nature study/science.
WPA perspectives: project work, ideally, in groups fosters and furthers teamwork, cooperation, collaboration. When students choose their own themes and do their own work and have to deal with the problems and setbacks they encounter, the learning can be powerful. It enables them to become resilient learners and their experiences of self-efficacy strengthen their will and self-identity.
Good Waldorf practice: Project work is a wonderful expression of self-activity, student activity and sharing with a community, communicating discoveries and their biographical significance. Students remember most in later life, what they did themselves, out of their own initiative (and they mostly forget the scaffolding and support they were given). It can start very early and modestly in the lower school and does not have to wait until grade 8!
Inquiry-based learning
This follows on from the idea of self-directed learning and project work. Inquiry based learning can be project based, it can be a task for an individual or a group or even a whole class. The point about an inquiry is that the teacher does not provide all the information and the students work to gather what they can find out about the subject. The students have to gather information from a variety of sources (usually provided or vetted by the teacher), collate the data they have collected (this could be in the form of autumn leaves of different shapes and colours, or measurements made in an experiment). Even reading a text can involve inquiry. Instead of the teacher setting questions that in effect ask, what does the text say about this or that, the students are asked to formulate questions that they think will help them understand the text of its subject better, and then they seek answers to their own questions. This form of open questioning makes students feel that they are being trusted to make discoveries and that their ideas are valid.
Finding out how something works, what it is, where it came from, how it grew or was made, what significance it has, are all questions requiring inquiry, calling for methods and frequently links to other knowledge and understanding of processes. It is the opposite of the object lesson, in which the teacher sets up an, often standardized, learning situation that guides them quickly to certain specific outcomes (rather than discoveries). Inquiry based learning starts with questions and ideally the students pose them themselves, with what guidance is necessary from the teacher. This is essentially a student-centred approach and therefore prompts self-activity.
WPA perspectives: asking questions is the basis of inquiry and when these questions are authentic, that is, they reflect the inner biographical intentions of the individual, they can lead to transformative learning.
Good Waldorf practice: the teacher allows students time to frame questions that open up the phenomena (what could it be? What would happen if…? How did it come about?) and guides them to interpret the item meaningfully.
Kinesthetic practical learning
This basically refers to ways of learning that involve movement and awareness of movement, and goes beyond sports, eurythmy, crafts, gardening and so on, where this kind of learning is obviously at home. Waldorf uses movement to activate students in the limbs as a way to awaken them in their ‘heads’, though it does depend on how you do it, as to whether it has this effect. The opposite to kinesthetic learning is sitting at a desk. Whenever students get up and move, they become livelier and more active (and often loud and harder to control, which is how they end up sitting in the first place). Kinesthetic learning is also linked to outdoor, off-site or hybrid learning, in which the site of learning moves from the classroom to the outdoors. This can be the school garden or grounds, but it can also be the surrounding countryside, the city itself and its various educational offers like museums and galleries, or further afield (Martyn and his co-class guardian once took a class 10 to Iceland for 10 days- and survived).
The quality of learning off-site depends on a number of factors. These include the preparation of the teacher, who knows what the location offers and how best to get around. Giving students tasks before they go (including of course all the rules of behaviour, safety for both the students and the place we visit - not picking flowers, trampling on farmer’s crops, not touching the exhibits, respecting the people who live and work there, what to do in emergencies, when to meet up again, when the bus is leaving etc) so they know what to focus on. The preparation of the students is also important. Do they have the right clothing, equipment, means of taking notes, enough of the right kind of food (and the understanding that we leave nothing behind, neither our rubbish nor our coats)? Trying to give instructions and carry out discussions with large groups on wind and rain swept mountainsides or busy museums or streets is not a good idea. More seriously, an off-site learning situation can be planned yet at the same time always has an element of the unexpected - more so than in the classroom over which the teacher generally has more control. If the students are well-prepared, they will also be open to the unexpected
Work on projects outdoors is hugely valuable, especially if the work has tangible results. Martyn has led projects from building a sizable timber building with shingle roofs (still standing at Michael Hall School), to constructing a children’s playground for a kindergarten in Romania, to building a functional outdoor bread/pizza oven and other useful things mainly with high school classes, but even class 3/4 students can lay bricks and build robust playhouses and sandpit retaining walls, class 6 students can clear brambles and plant fruit trees , class 8 students can plant grass on sand dunes and built wooden fences to stabilise the dunes. The important thing is that the work is outdoors, useful and manageable and then the learning is rich and long lasting.
WPA perspectives: when the will is engaged through direct sensory experience and movement, then this ‘sleeping’ aspect of the human being awakens their thinking.
Good Waldorf practice: Outdoor learning, crafting, field trips and learning that involves natural movement are a regular feature of Waldorf teaching- the more the better. Outdoor can literally be the school yard or grounds but can also include the resources of the city (parks, gardens, museums, art galleries etc.) as well as further afield in the mountains, in other countries.
Station work, or carousel learning
This refers to setting up a series of tasks that students can do in a sequence in small groups, moving from one task to the next until they have finished them all. This takes a lot of initial preparation on behalf of the teacher and imagination to create tasks that the students can mainly do on their own (because the teacher can’t be at all stations along the line). This method is good if the tasks (experiments for example) are best done by small groups. It encourages group work, cooperation and independent learning, which are basically good things. The stations can be progressively more difficult though this is somewhat self-defeating since there will be log jams as the students quickly finish the easier tasks and take longer with the harder ones. Another version is ‘assembly line’ tasks in which the students move through a sequence of tasks in an overall process of ‘mass producing’ wooden articles, food products, which involve a number of stations from preparing the material, through to packaging etc.  The students will need to record their results and experiences. It is very helpful to involve the students in setting up the tasks and in reflecting on all the processes involved.
The tasks need good written instructions that are self-explanatory, or else the teacher will be forever providing clarification. An alternative option is to have older students running each station, which provides a different learning experience for each age group.
Good Waldorf practice: station work means that more students can be actively involved in experiments and practical tasks at any one time. The stations can involve different but related tasks (geological or botanical samples), different simple experiments (simple experiments with the effects of salts on physical and biological materials, burning different materials, all of which can be done with non-toxic materials and therefore without special equipment). Station work can also be done with different levels of tasks (in maths for example). In crafts, station work is sometimes help in the ‘mass production’ of things like candles, soap, simple toys, or baking or preserving fruits etc., in which several processes are involved, including packaging, especially if these commodities are to be sold (school market). Station work fosters cooperation.
Discussions
Discussion can be a very fruitful form of learning and can take a number of different forms. The important aspect of discussion is not only the exchange of views, which can be rather binary, but the way in which an idea is developed among the participants. A classroom discussion that involves the teacher posing questions and (usually a few) students answering them is not a discussion, but actually a kind of affirmation or even test. A discussion starts with a statement and is followed by a response to that, which then opens up into an exchange that ideally has direction, namely towards greater understanding than the participants had before. Then it becomes a learning experience for all concerned. Therefore, a discussion needs an opening statement or thesis, along the lines of, “Caesar crossing the Rubicon is often presented as if he had a choice, but I think that he actually had no choice.” This statement invites others to agree or disagree and then reasons need to be given. Discussions arise when there are more than more possible ways of seeing things. The aim of a discussion is to collectively come to a better understanding, whereas the aim of a debate is to win the argument using rhetorical skills and arguments. Debates are good in high school when the students can test their powers of persuasion, though this is often stylised and not designed to seek the truth but rather to win an argument.
Whole class discussions can be led by the teacher but once the rules have been learned they can fruitfully be led by students (perhaps in pairs). Whole class discussions often involve relatively few (and often the same) students, so smaller group discussions involve most people. Group discussions often benefit from having a moderator, who does not participate and or offer an opinion but sees to it that everyone gets a chance to participate, that some people don’t dominate the discussion, that they stay on topic and within the limits that have been set. Discussion can be reviewed afterwards. Many adults lack the ability to participate in discussions and thus this is an important skill that should be learned in school.
Variations of discussion include pairwork, which offers the most involvement, since each person takes turns in speaking and listening. The goldfish bowl method involves a smaller group or pair sitting in the middle and a larger group sitting round them, following the discussion. At some point in the flow of the discussion, members of the outer ring can join the discussion or swap places with those in the fishbowl.
WPA perspectives: Discussions exercise sense of language, sense of thought and the perception of the other and enable students to learn to appreciate other positions and standpoints and to be able to position themselves. Good discussion involves active listening and narrative empathy, the ability to understand the other and tell their story faithfully. At the same the dialogic nature of discussion schools the ability to move between active listening and putting one’s own position and view forward and is therefore a basis for healthy social interaction.
Good Waldorf practice: Waldorf teaching without discussions is hard to imagine. It is a central activity in school work and is especially democratic in its basic gesture that all can contribute and no one has the final say.
Recitation
Recitation is such a taken-for-granted activity in Waldorf classrooms that we perhaps don’t always stop to ask why we do it. Singing in a choir seems fairly obvious but reciting in ‘chorus’ is less obvious from a pedagogical perspective. The simple fact of everyone doing the same thing in a tightly controlled way (the speaking of the individuals has to be coordinated in a group) creates a sense of belonging in a group and when done well, can be powerful for listeners (such as parents at a festival). Martyn once witnessed a grade five class in India reciting by heart in Sanskrit (which is not the language children speak) for 17 minutes (the teacher needed the text)! It was powerful and impressive, a testimony to the powers of memory children can develop at this age. In earlier cultures children learned whole texts from the Quran, or Torah or Bible and there doesn’t appear to be any limit to what children can learn by heart. Actors, of course, learn lengthy parts by heart and musicians can sing for hours texts they know by heart. Ballads, epic poems, songs with many verses are easier to learn because they have regular rhymes and meters to aid our memory. So reciting is a good way of exercising the memory.
The effect of group recitation on those reciting is interesting to observe. When the students get into it, there is noticeable withdrawal of individual attention, which has a harmonising effect (which is why it is a useful method during the attuning phase of the lessons). If individuals speak lines or roles, they step out of the collective chorus, as it were, and become more awake as they have to concentrate on their cues and speaking. Individual speaking wakes up, choral participation spreads the consciousness across the group, which is helpful for activating rhythmical memory, whereas speaking on your own awakens one to individual memory.
Speaking poems in chorus depends on the poem. As a poet one might not appreciate our carefully crafted words, chosen for their phonetic, semantic and associative qualities being submerged in a collective sound. Some poems and pieces of prose are more suited than others to recitation than others and it is a shame to spoil good poetry by making it choral. Far better to let individual voices (or two) be spoken so that the listener can really hear the words clearly. Artistic speaking means having the right material spoken in a way that enhances the meaning of the words. Whilst our aim is pedagogical, we must also take into account, what effect it has on the poetry and the students’ appreciation of that poetry in the long run. There is no evidence that inartistic choral recitation enhances interest in and understanding of poetry- indeed it may have the opposite effect. That’s what makes teacher as a craft (known the effects of your tools and the nature of the materials) and as an art (knowing how to apply them in a way that generates meaning).
WPA perspectives: Speaking together with others requires active and selfless listening. It involves engaging rhythmically with language. Reciting a poem alone requires empathic language skills, as well as articulation and sense of word and language.  Recitation with variation and with consciousness strengthens memory and deepens understanding.
Good Waldorf practice: this includes not only the whole-class choral presentations that are the stock of many school festivals, but should include solo voices, or artistic compositions of voices. Learning poems and texts by heart and being able to speak them publicly is a basic feature of Waldorf education.
TED talks
We had to look this up, but now we and you know that TED talks originated at a Technology, Education and Design conference in 1984. Since then, the TED organisation has promoted short, entertaining and informative talks all over the world on important topics by interesting people. The aim is to present a good idea in 18 minutes. This is a method that is best introduced in grade 9 after students have had several years of learning how to stand in front the class and make a presentation. The strict framework off the TED talk needs to build on such experiences and helps the students focus.
It is helpful to see a couple of suitable examples online before encouraging students to use this form of presentation, and, as in all methods, it is important to discuss with the students first (and we mean discuss, not just inform), what criteria are relevant (what picture material can support the presentation, powerpoint or not, using cards with key words etc.).
WPA perspective: In order to deliver TED talks the student need to have immersed themselves in a topic and made it their own, to the extent they can present it freely in a clear, concise, and convincing way, using only their body in front of a live audience. This requires insight, knowledge and presentational skills to engage the listeners, yet leave them free to have their own thoughts. It can be inspiring to experience a good TED talk and it can be transformative to deliver a good talk.
Good Waldorf practice: TED talks belong in the broad spectrum of Waldorf forms of presentation and performance. It is the result of individual preparation and presentation but takes the audience into account. It is commonly used in second language learning.
Creative writing and speaking tasks
Ulrike Sievers book  on creative teaching offers a wealth of suggestions for creative writing and speaking, originally for second language teaching, but equally applies to lessons in the language of instruction. Favourites include the use of images in various media as prompts for speaking and writing. The classic example is using postcards (not the originals, because they don’t survive constant wear and tear in classroom situations are sometimes not easily replaced). Ideally the images show people, sometimes nature moods. Here are just some of the multiple uses of postcards. These exercises are firstly prompts for speaking, then for writing.
Describe the scene to someone who can’t see the image and they have to draw what is described. Then show the image and have a conversation about it.
Who are the people portrayed, what is their background, even their biography? This is not a question of historical research, but the imagination and the students are unlimited in what they can imagine.
Write a possible dialogue between the people.
Describe what happened immediately before and after this moment?
Embed the scene in a short story or short play.
Describe the nature mood and its implications for the story you weave around it.
Film analysis: story boards, camera shots, scripts.
Analyse the single camera shot first 60 seconds of some famous films (e.g. Forest Gump, Paris Texas, Fried Green Tomatoes, Snow Falling on Cedars, The Shipping News etc.)
The use of postcards does not require any art history background knowledge (in fact the less the better) because we are not analysing the images as art but using them as prompts for speaking and writing. Experience shows that the images that work best are naturalistic, impressionist, modern photography, which puts them nearly all in the later 19th century, and 20th century. Baroque, Renaissance or Medieval or ancient art has a very different effect and context and is much harder to identify with as people we can immediately relate to.
Creative writing exercises can start with a story read or told in class, and the students have to continue the story, give it an alternative ending, describe the scene from another perspective (the view of the ship’s cat, the owl watching from the oak tree, the foot soldier, the child, the stranger). Descriptions can be prompted by nature moods (e.g. a storm at sea, in a remote cabin in the woods).
WPA perspectives: As in all tasks that require students to be skilled and creative, this strengthens their sense of self and confidence, as well as developing their empathy because creative writing is always for an audience and has top consider how best to move the reader or listener. Being a creative writer also enables the student to appreciate the writing of others.
Good Waldorf practice: creative writing and speaking exercises begin at the latest in grade 5. This assumes the students have reached a level of literacy that enables them to write creatively.
Flipped classroom
Originally the flipped classroom referred to an acronym for Flexible learning environment, Learning culture shift, Intentional content and Professional teacher (which definitely needed abbreviating). It arose as an attempt to overcome passive forms of teaching and reverse the normal process of work in school, being followed up with homework with the character of applying, practising and consolidating what was learned in class. It is therefore a student-centred learning method that moves the focus of initial learning from the classroom and the group to the individual at home, or elsewhere. The idea is that the teacher guides the students to explore concepts on their own and engage creatively with the subject. The students then determine when and where they work, and with whom, which is supposed to increase motivation. The time spent in class is then for deepening, discussion of what individuals or groups have learned elsewhere from other sources (often online). The idea also assumes a higher level of professionalism by the teacher because she can observe and monitor individual learning processes and can then advise and guide more individually. The teacher is available to students, who come with questions and are looking for feedback to the questions they have and the work they produce.
Many aspects of the flipped classroom are present within the rhythmic approach to learning followed by good Waldorf teachers. In models of flipped learning, the aspects of rich experience, recalling, and some meaning making are done before the students come to the class; further clarification, supplementation, elaboration and contextualising are done in the classroom; with demonstration of learning often done independently after the lesson. In a Waldorf main morning lesson embedded in a block, all of these activities are mostly done in the classroom. The similarities lie in that both approaches encourage self-activity and self-directed learning. These are important and can happen in a well-planned Waldorf main lesson, in all the phases of work when the teacher and the blackboard are not the focus. The important aspect of flipped learning is the dialogue and feedback the teachers give to the students and this can be done within the framework of a 120 minute lesson which has numerous phases.
WPA perspectives: The approach encourages the self-activity and motivation of the students and encourages them to take responsibility for their learning.
Good Waldorf practice: this method encourages independent and group learning and is characterized by the students planning and taking responsibility for the work process. In Waldorf settings, this would need to be seen as one of the main aims of a main lesson block or field trip, because it cannot easily be combined with the notion of teaching a set amount of content (“we have to do all this, and we only have three weeks a year”). If teachers value this learning process, they have to sacrifice the idea of a minimum content that has to be learned and be open to the unpredictable but often unexpectedly rich results.
Using (digital) media in teaching
Media are forms of technology that mediate information and ideas, facilitate teaching and learning and traditionally this included books, posters, pictures in multiple forms, blackboards (of various kinds), paper. Today, of course, the word mainly refers to digital media. Until about 10 years ago Waldorf education was characterized by the term ‘digital media abstinence’, which went hand in hand with avoidance of machines and electrical tools, preferring to emphasize the use of traditional hand tools.
Our understanding of media changed with the emergence of media studies and Marshall McLuhan’s famous saying “the media is the message”. The Canadian philosopher, inspired by the medieval philosopher Thomas of Aquinas (died 1274), emphasized the importance of direct sensory experience and the feelings and affects that accompany these or aistheis- a term we have used many times in this book- as a basis for human understanding. Media are cultural artefacts of tools that mediate our relationship to the world, by extending our sensory experience or symbolizing it (as in the use of symbols, signs, images, letters, numbers that represent sensory qualities). The nature of the tools we use modifies and shapes the way we perceive the world and therefore the medium we use is also part of the message. McLuhan’s core idea was that technology derives from culture but operates by nature (and the laws of physics, chemistry and biology). He wrote, “the new media are not bridges between man (sic) and nature: they are nature.” The entire ‘sensorium’ of sensory faculties through which we engage with the world are biological media and technology is an extension of this and both are interwoven with mental ‘media’ through our powers of thinking, feeling and willing. Human cultural evolution has gone hand in hand (literally) with the making of tools and artefacts. It makes sense that children follow a similar path that leads from primary sensory development, the use of analog media followed by the conscious introduction of digital media. By conscious we mean first using, then understanding.
We recommend the use of digital media in support of regular teaching, for example showing images, videos, using powerpoints using projectors or smart boards, when this is the best way to present this material. Afterall all children are used to seeing digital images before they even learn to read and write. Teachers should bear in mind that the medium of projecting images can never replace direct experience (if this is possible) and qualities that artistic presentations (of plants, animals, landscapes, etc) have that digital media don’t. One thinks of the beautiful and evocative illustration in many traditional books about nature that capture the essence of the phenomenon often better than any photograph (which could be reproduced digitally and shown). The point is, teachers have to make conscious decisions about what media they wish to use based on what impression they want to create for the students. An accurate map (once children have learned how to make maps in grade 4) projected onto a screen is much better than a badly drawn map on the blackboard. But a drawing may be more expressive than a photo.
Media education is a new ‘subject’ in the Waldorf curriculum and is a response to the dominant role of media and in particular digital media in the lifeworld. Though it may have the occasional dedicated teaching block, it is a set of competences that can be found across the curriculum, often as a new perspective (e.g. in geography, where global positioning systems have changed how we perceive and represent the world, or in orality and literacy, where it has changed how we communicate and how we deal with texts and information).
Waldorf education works on the assumption that children should have analog literacy skills (reading, writing, narrating, communicating with others, expressing their thoughts and feeling in images) before being formally introduced to digital media, as an extension of literacy. Media education requires that certain activities such as drawing, which have generally not been taught in the lower school, need to be taught so that children at least learn the various possibilities of producing images (and models). They should learn various techniques in different media and using different materials (e.g. drawing with way crayons, coloured pencils, pastel sticks, charcoal and graphite pencils, dry and wet paints, collage etc.). This should not inhibit but increase their possibilities for expressing what they imagine. This is a different activity to experiencing colours through wet-in-wet techniques which have a different function.
One area that is often overlooked is ‘material Bildung’, that is, the formative effect of learning craft activities involving authentic materials, tools, workshop/studio environments, and following a phase of immersion in the techniques, a phase of emergent reflection on cultural history and meaning of craft work. In the British Waldorf movement this is often referred to as crafting and involves sources materials locally, processing them, learning the history and language associated with the activity, and where possible, conducting the activities in the ‘outdoor classroom’. Thus, students learn to appreciate the origins and development of technology, the nature of the design process which takes form, materials, tools and function into account. This is an essential embodied basis for using digital tools.
Many schools today use online platforms on which they can upload links to selected websites, images, texts and other materials that the students can access. Apart from saving paper and photocopying costs, this enables teacher to direct the attention of students to material they have vetted and selected, and even in some cases curated. This means that students do not have to surf the internet looking for material for research projects. Mainly these platforms are used outside of lessons as support for homework. My school also has class sets of ipads and notebooks that can be incorporated into lessons, with internet access. The teacher has access to the students’ screens but this is rarely used as there is a learning climate of trust and anyway the teacher is the room walking around talking to students.
These tools are used to the extent that the teachers find them useful in their lessons. The students have some instruction into the use of text documents, layout tools and locating, saving and retrieving documents, but otherwise they are usually self-taught and frequently can troubleshoot better than the teachers.
We are well past the days when there are debates about whether digital media belong in a Waldorf school and most schools in Europe follow the media pedagogy curriculum developed in Germany by Professor Edwin Hübner and Robert Neumann and which the European Council of Steiner Waldorf Education distributed in various languages. Each school needs to decide for itself how and when it wishes to use digital media as learning tools and what media curriculum it wishes to use.
We just need to ensure that using media doesn’t become ‘edutainment’ or thinking of things to do with tablets. The media should serve the learning. There can be both low and high tech versions of many learning methods today (e.g. flipped classroom, inquiry based learning linked to internet platforms, databases, students at other schools etc., personalised learning in which individuals have their own specific online learning programmes, e.g. migrant children getting a crash course in the language of instruction, online games -to our knowledge rarely used in Waldorf, audio tutoring, blogs and video diaries, accessing TED talks )
The question as to when media are used in the classroom cannot easily be resolved with reference to Steiner’s pedagogical anthropology, although his references to children’s ability to generate (and presumably process) images is interesting. The overall aim of Waldorf educations is to equip young people with what they need to be active citizen and what we teach is based on the teachers’ reading of “social necessities”. It is obvious that children need to know how to deal with digital media and that how they do this follows the principle of first analog media and technology (basic literacy and working with pictures) followed by digital tools and media. This transition needs to occur before puberty because the transformations to the brain (and the life processes that drive these) mean that young people need a strong mental framework to build on. What is vital is that children need to learn the language to talk about experiences based on all media, and learn to discern, what is important, relevant and healthy.
WPA perspectives: Working with digital media follows the core developmental principle of Waldorf education, which is to start with sensory, experiential experience of analogue media before moving on to technically produced images and text. This is absolutely not an argument not to learn about digital media in school. The only question is when and how. If Waldorf students are to be capable and responsible citizens, they definitely need to learn about digital tools and how to use them in age-appropriate ways. Since students learn how use digital tools such as smart phone at an early age, then they need to be taught about the use, abuse and meaning of digital tools and media before they enter puberty, or at least not later than this important transition when their emotional lives make them susceptible to addiction. The solution to addiction is not banning their use (though limiting their use is essential) but enabling them to be aware of the effects of digital media in all their various forms, including image making and artificial intelligence.
Good Waldorf practice: Digital tools are used when they offer the best pedagogical solution to allowing students access to things that they can’t otherwise access. A well-thought through concept of media pedagogy takes account of both developmental factors and the needs for contemporary skills and tool use.
Blended learning
The basic idea of blended learning is that different locations and media which involve learning are combined or made into a hybrid. It is most common in adult education and high school education. During the Covid pandemic blended learning suddenly became topical because students had to be taught remotely, usually through video meetings and making use of online data resources. However, we should not confuse blended learning as a choice with emergency remote learning because the students cannot come to school.
The idea of blended learning is of course much older, if we interpret it to mean learning that it integrates different media and uses locations outside the classroom. In many ways Waldorf education has always had a strong blended component when we think about all the craft activities (carried out in workshops rather than classrooms), outdoor learning in the school garden and nature, practical projects, farming and industry practicals, surveying and geology trips and so on. Until more recently, the use of technology has been minimal and largely analog (even surveying usually uses mechanical theodolites). But there is no reason why photography and video cannot be added and the use of online resources for research. Using platforms like Moodle, Google classroom or Padlet offer the possibility of both teachers and students to upload texts, images, links and so on as resources for the class. Many high school teachers (like Martyn) receive assignments from students in digital form and return these with feedback online. Students who have to be away from school for longer periods can use these resources at home.
As with all tools, we have to understand their usage, their benefits and limitations and we have to know how to blend their use meaningfully into pedagogical processes. No one doubts that face-to-face teaching is the preferred choice because of the embodied aspects of being together in a shared space, able to read and understand the subtle signals of body language, gesture, movement that accompany and enrich our being together. A teacher can literally see far more that is going on in even large groups of students than they ever can on video, which offers us at best talking heads, and often not even that.
One important distinction we have learned to make is between synchronous and asynchronous learning and finding the right balance between these depending on the age of the pupils and the activities. Synchronous learning is everyone doing it at the same time, as in a live classroom; asynchronous means students working when they can, or when they want. For example, synchronous offline learning might include setting a timetable for the daily work and students (with or without parental help) regulate this themselves, but all students are spending the same time doing the same tasks, e.g. from 9 to 10 am.
Examples of different online- offline, synchronous and asynchronous activities:
WPA perspectives: as noted in the point above, students are not served if their teachers ignore the possibilities that combinations of methods- analogue and digital- online-offline – offer. The question is how to do it in ways that support transformative learning, which mere consumption of media is not.
Good Waldorf practice: methods are chosen that are age-appropriate and relevant to the aims. Digital tools are used where they are meaningful (and not avoided for merely ideological reasons). Online platforms that provide students with links to vetted external websites or curated internal information sources are very useful and pedagogically meaningful (not least because they show students how to use the internet meaningfully).
Documentation and reflection
Main lesson books/folders/portfolios
The colourful main lesson books with beautiful illustrations and sophisticated texts are an integral part of the educational system for Waldorf pupils in their first eight years, as well as for their parents and teachers. In secondary school, the traditional notebooks are usually replaced sooner or later by college pads and folders – in the confidence that the young people have developed sufficient organisational skills during their first eight years of schooling to be able to keep a folder clear and well structured.
Just as teachers are expected to plan and present their own material, frequently using narrative as a means of introducing important new experiences, so too the students use active learning tools. One the primary learning tools is making their own records of what they have experienced, worked on and learned. This is frequently done in the form of hand-written (sometimes even hand-made) books that record everything that is important within a particular block and its themes. Students are guided from the beginning, as soon as they can write (technically as soon as they can draw) to produce their own texts and illustrate what they have learned. By the upper school they do this with a high degree of autonomy, taking great pride in compiling collections of notes, documents, picture material, texts they have written, reflections, illustrations and material they feel is important to the theme.
Over the course of the lower and middle school their books on continuing themes such as history, geography, nature study document their learning journey. It is important that students are supported and encouraged to formulate their own thoughts and experiences, however briefly and simply, right from class 1 onwards. Copying down texts that teachers have composed or from other sources is a relative waste of time in pure learning terms and it is hard to imagine that children don’t always have better things to do in school or at home. If there are important texts as sources the students get these as copies and perhaps have tasks related to their reading and understanding of them, just as they might be given pictures, graphics that would be too time-consuming or complex to copy.
For this reason (and for the point related to the teacher’s activity already mentioned above) conventional textbooks are not used, nor texts which summarise what has to be learned. The general principle of teacher involvement, selection and presentation have already been made and anything that waters this down is avoided. The students naturally have access to original literature, good quality images as appropriate, maps and charts and, where it is helpful, videos and film. The point is that these media, where possible original sources, supplement the direct experience of the students and or the narrative of the teacher.
In an age in which access to information is generally not the problem, but rather the selection, evaluation and relevance of it is, the act of constructing, curating, annotating and presenting their own textbooks, collections of materials, portfolios, even in digital form for older students, is a valuable preparation for later life. In doing so, initially by hand, they learn the possibilities of presentations, the need to be succinct, relevant, organised and how to get a message across. Of course they need to see good and bad models, but merely copying from the board or from photocopies does not enhance understanding, nor encourage mastery of the medium. Apart from aesthetic aspects, ecological aspects are always borne in mind with regard to wasting paper, unnecessary photocopying, and the virtue of taking care and pride in one’s own productions are cultivated.
Making their own books is just one example of active learning. As we have discussed in the section on the learning process, the stages of learning the children and young people experience is designed to enhance their self-activity in observing, retrieving, re-constructing and forming concepts. Both students and teachers are encouraged to apply what they have learned to produce useful and meaningful things, not just in the handwork and crafts programme, but in artistic presentations across the literary and visual arts, to science and historical research. None of this means that they don’t also appreciate other sources, but making your own books, clothes, growing your own vegetables and so on is not only sustainable but is an important counterbalance to a throw-away economy.
WPA perspectives: As stated in the text, the ability to document and present what one has learned can support transformative learning and is a practical and useful skill. For this to be effective, students need guidance and merely making beautiful illustrations or decorations does not support the learning enough to spend much time on it.
Good Waldorf practice: all Waldorf schools use main lesson books to document the contents of the lesson block themes. They are often very artistic with illustration and text.
Examples of main lesson books
Learning journals
The term ‘learning journal’ is often used to refer to a document that the teacher uses to record and monitor student achievements and progress – effectively a tool for assessment. However, learning journals can also be used for the learner to document what has been learned – the main experiences that have been had, and what they meant for the learner. In some respects, the main lesson book is a learning journal. But what makes it a learning tool, and not just a record of what students have done, is the reflective process that is the important part of the journaling. This can be very simple at first. Students can simply write what their feelings and thoughts were alongside what they did, what impressions they had and also what question they have. The teacher may read it naturally and may even judge whether it is complete enough, but it is essentially a learning tool for the learner. Students can begin with learning journals as soon as they can about their own experiences. The texts can be short at first, simply recording what was done, seen, heard and what thoughts the student had.
Video diaries are unusual in Waldorf education but not unknown. For students who find writing a challenge, recording verbal comments and taking photographs or even short videos is a good way to document certain activities. The same criteria apply to all things done in Waldorf, the form should fit the function and there should be an aesthetic element.
Good Waldorf practice: students start using learning journals to accompany field trips, outdoor classroom activities and particularly during practical and internships.
Collective artistic expressions
A mural or paper version of one can give expression to key themes. The Nanshan Waldorf School in China has interesting murals painted by students portraying archetypal basketball movements. A main lesson can be illustrated by a big picture frieze, which like the famous Bayeux Tapestry records the significant events of a history block in a linear pictorial way. Whatever the theme (science experiments and historical events) there needs to be cooperation and planning and the involvement of everyone.
Another way of achieving this is to create a newspaper in which each student contributes stories or images reflecting the themes of the block. A creative writing main lesson can lead to the publication of a booklet in which each student has a short story, poem or picture.
Curated exhibitions are a good way for the class as a learning community to get a sense of their shared experiences and differences. All have the same task, but the individual solutions are all different. The curating process can also be something the students can do, either by delegating to a few individuals who chose the works and how to arrange them, and to decide what information needs to be provided and how best to do this. Curating means making choices and justifying these. Too many teachers feel they have come in on weekends and evenings to hang the pictures, but it is a better learning experience for some students to do this.
Posters are another way of expressing the essence of a theme. Obviously not the whole class can work on a single poster, though this can be done in pairs. Therefore, exhibition of posters can give considerable insight into the themes, especially if the students are allowed to design their own posts.
Good Waldorf practice: trust the students to take responsibility and be creative collectively.
Endnotes
